---
layout: default
title:  "Problem of Evil"
date:   2017-04-10

type:   Writing
categories: philosophy religion theodicy
---
A short essay written for Saints, Heretics, and Atheists: An Historical Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion. The essay discusses the age old problem of evil and examines one response to it. 

## Prompt

Read <a href="http://www.ditext.com/mackie/evil.html">J. L. Mackie’s "Evil and Omnipotence"</a>. In it, Mackie identifies what he considers to be four “fallacious” solutions to the logical problem of evil. Pick one of those four solutions, and briefly argue that it will or won’t work (i.e. for thinking that it is or is not fallacious). The reason(s) you provide do not have to be conclusive. 

## The Odyssey: Theodicy

<span data-balloon="Chaney: You’re quite right that the problem of evil leads some theists to question their faith in such a God! But these sentences aren’t actually necessary to include. For the problem of evil concerns God’s omnibenevolence, not his love. In general, you should try to omit sentences that don’t contribute in a straightforward way to the argument of the paper (as I’m sure you know)." data-balloon-length="xlarge">For some theists, the problem of evil may lead them to question their faith in an all-loving God. After all, if God is loving, God should not let evil exist.</span> In Mackie’s essay “Evil and Omnipotence”, he sets up the problem of evil in a way that is logically impossible to resolve without abandoning one of its assumptions. However, Mackie identifies four common, fallacious solutions that attempt to address the problem of evil without abandoning one of the assumptions and attempts to uncover their fallacies. This essay examines the final solution, that "evil is due to human free will", and identifies its hidden contradictions. 

First, we lay out the problem and the solution. As Mackie states, the solution is only problematic given a certain statement of the problem of evil. Mackie sets up the problem as such: God is omnipotent, God is wholly good, and evil exists. Additionally, <span data-balloon="Chaney: Or a good being eliminates evil as far as it can. His statement of this principle is a bit peculiar. For sometimes he says good itself eliminates evil as far as it can (as though good were an agent that can eliminate things?). Other times he says a good being or thing eliminates evil as far as it can (which makes more sense). I think his considered view, which renders the application to God more comprehensible, is that a good being or thing eliminates evil as far as it can." data-balloon-length="xlarge">good seeks to eliminate evil as far as it can and there are no limits to God’s omnipotence</span>. Thus, any solution arguing that it is impossible for God to eliminate evil violates the assumption that God is omnipotent. 

Nonetheless, one common response to the problem is to attribute evil to human free will, which God endows to humanity. <span data-balloon="Chaney: Or freely act in general. The price for free action in general, the solution goes, is occasional (maybe even frequent) evil." data-balloon-length="xlarge">This solution argues that it is better that people freely love God than unfreely love God even if that leads to evil</span>. 

<span data-balloon="Chaney: In fact, you don’t actually need this sentence. You’re totally right that Mackie says this. However, he doesn’t end up arguing that the notion of free will is incoherent (he’s says it’s too big of an issue to get into in this specific paper), and what you say in the rest of the paragraph is separate from that view." data-balloon-length="xlarge">Mackie states that this solution is unsatisfactory</span> primarily because of the incoherence of the notion of freedom of will. Mackie argues that God could have created humanity such that everyone always freely chooses the good option over the evil. At first pass, this proposal sounds absurd—if God created human such that they freely chose the good option, then logically it appears that they are not free in any conventional sense of the word. But on a second examination, Mackie’s proposal seems more reasonable. It is possible, if everyone has free will, for everyone to make the right decision without God taking any action. Thieves would just need to make the decision not to steal, adulterers to not adulter, etc. If this is possible, then it must be possible for God to make such a world exist. Arguing otherwise would infringe upon God’s omnipotence. 

<span data-balloon="Chaney: I don’t completely follow your thinking in this paragraph. Are you presenting another reason to think that the existence of evil is incompatible with the traditional conception of God? Here are three suggestions. 1. Do slow down a bit in presenting these claims, objections and replies. If I follow, the first sentence presents a problem for the compatibility thesis (i.e., the thesis that there is no logical incompatibility). The second sentence objects to that supposed problem. The third sentence replies to that objection. Those three different moves could really be spelled out in more detail. 2. If you spelled out these moves in more detail, you would be able to explain the connection between sentences two and three more clearly. For how exactly does the fact that putatively evil actions lead to more good show that they aren’t really evil after all? 3. One of the ideas Mackie considers in his paper, and spends a good amount of space on, is that God cannot intervene to prevent people’s free actions. This is different from the situation you describe in sentence two, namely that God could intervene but doesn’t. You might have considered what Mackie would say about this idea. He associates it with an interesting Paradox of Omnipotence." data-balloon-length="xlarge">Additionally, one could question why God does not intervene when people make bad choices or prevent the evil consequences. Because God could do these things and does not, the easiest explanation is that the evil actions are, on the whole, good or lead to more good. However, this contradicts the idea that evil is really evil and are left with the conclusion that God is not truly omnipotent</span>. 

While there are other possible lines of argumentation one could take, they ultimately all end with accepting a limit on God’s omnipotence. Even Mackie agrees that accepting a limitation on God’s omnipotence is an acceptable solution to the problem of evil, at least on its face. Thus, while the problem of evil still remains an open discussion for theists and theologians, this particular phrasing of the problem of evil helps to color in the negative zones of our conception about God and the world, demonstrating that which cannot be but not identifying that which is. 

## Chaney's Feedback

Although for the most part you do a really lovely job of explaining difficult philosophical ideas clearly (e.g., in your statement of the logical problem itself and in your subsequent discussion of the possibility that we freely only do what’s good), sometimes you need to slow down and take more time to explain your claims. :-) The main case of this is in your penultimate paragraph, in which three different moves are made in three consecutive sentences. It’s hard to follow exactly what you’re suggesting when you don’t devote a whole lot of space to exploring the ideas. In fact, you may have been better off omitting both that paragraph and the final paragraph and replacing them with a discussion of how Mackie would respond to the following proposal: God doesn’t intervene to prevent our evil actions because he can’t, having given us a free will that he can’t control. This proposal, as you’ll recall, leads to his in depth discussion of the Paradox of Omnipotence and the two tiers or orders of omnipotence (first-order and second-order).
