---
layout: default
title:  "2019 Reading List"
date:   2019-03-02

type:   Note
categories: reading list
---

One of my goals for 2019 is to keep better track of what I do with my time. Because I like curating my anime list so much, I figure I could do the same with books. 

### Between the World and Me  
Author: Ta-Nehisi Coates  
Date published: July 2015  
Date rate: February 22, 2019  

Book club book.  

### Blood, Sweat, and Pixels: The Triumphant, Turbulent Stories Behind How Video Games Are Made
Author: Jason Schreier  
Date published: September 5, 2017  
Date read: February 13, 2019

Video games are a big part of my life and the premise of this book was particularly intriguing. I previously interned at Activision\|Blizzard's [Infinity Ward studio](http://www.thomasjiang.com/2017/08/05/infinity-ward-postmortem.html) and there has been a [significant news](https://kotaku.com/the-fallout-of-activision-blizzard-s-massive-layoffs-1832597892) regarding them recently. It is a light, fun read with lots of little nuggets of insight. There was quite a bit in the book that reminded me of my incredibly brief time in the industry.  

### The Two--Income Trap: Why Middle-Class Parents Are (Still) Going Broke
Author: Elizabeth Warren and Amelia Warren Tyagi  
Date published: 2004 (2016 Reissue)  
Date read: February 10, 2019  

A very captivating, interesting, worrying read.

### Siddhartha 
Author: Herman Hesse  
Date published: 1922 (1951 USA)  
Date read: February 6, 2019  
[Gutenberg Project](http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/2500/pg2500.txt)   

One of my friends's favorites.

#### Interesting Quotes

> I have already learned as a child. I have known it for a long time, but I have experienced only now. And now I know it, don't just know it in my memory, but in my eyes, in my heart, in my stomach. Good for me, to know this!

> Had his father not also suffered the same pain for him, which he now suffered for his son? Had his father not long since died, alone, without having seen his son again? Did he not have to expect the same fate for himself? Was it not a comedy, a strange and stupid matter, this repetition, this running around in a fateful circle?

> Knowledge can be conveyed, but not wisdom. It can be found, it can be lived, it is possible to be carried by it, miracles can be performed with it, but it cannot be expressed in words and taught.

### The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe 
Author: C. S. Lewis   
Date published: 1950  
Date read: January 29, 2019  

C.S. Lewis has always been an author that has been present but I've never read. When I was young, The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe was immensely popular, but I never picked it up. As I got older, there was always someone in my life that was a devout Christian - one of my best friends in high school and then later, in the college, one of my college roommates, and then after I graduated, a good friend. All of them read and recommended Lewis's The Screwtape Letters. So I figured it would be appropriate, after reading Pachinko, to read The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe.

### Pachinko  
Author: Min Jin Lee   
Date published: 2017  
Date read: January 21, 2019  

This was my book club's read for January. In our discussion, we talked about identity, agency, and compatibility. For a book that covers so many people, so many generations, and so many situations, it would be interesting to look at how efficient Min Jin Lee is in her writing to cover all of these topics.

### The Awakening
Author: Kate Chopin  
Date published: 1899  
Date read: January 6, 2019  
[Gutenberg Project](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/160/160-h/160-h.htm)  

I was thinking about how to write compelling dialogue, a difficult problem for anyone just starting to pen their masterpiece, and was particularly keen on observing the dialogue in this piece. I have no idea whether _The Awakening_ stands out in particular for its dialogue. More certainly, it is the feminist social commentary that has blessed the work with its longevity and cultural prestige. 

Two works that I think to be read in comparison to _The Awakening_ are [_The Story of an Hour (1894)_](https://archive.vcu.edu/english/engweb/webtexts/hour/), a Chopin short story, and Tolstoy's [Anna Karenina](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1399/1399-h/1399-h.htm). I think the three are strikingly similar. 

#### Interesting Quotes

> [Mademoiselle Reisz] "Why?" asked her companion. "Why do you love him when you ought not to?" 
>
> Edna, with a motion or two, dragged herself on her knees before Mademoiselle Reisz, who took the glowing face between her two hands. 
>
> "Why? Because his hair is brown and grows away from his temples; because he opens and shuts his eyes, and his nose is a little out of drawing; because he has two lips and square chin, and a little finger which he can't straighten from having played baseball too energetically in his youth. Because--"
>
> "Because you do, in short," laughed Mademoiselle.

> Furthermore, in one of the daily papers appeared a brief notice to the effect that Mr. and Mrs. Pontellier were contemplating a summer sojourn abroad, and that their handsome residence on Esplanade Street was undergoing sumptuous alterations, and would not be ready for occupancy until their return. Mr. Pontellier had saved appearances!

> It was not that she dwelt upon details of their acquaintance, or recalled in any special or peculiar way his personality; it was his being, his existence, which dominated her thoughts, fading sometimes as if it would melt into the mist of the forgotten, reviving again with an intensity which filled her with an incomprehensible longing.

### The Importance of Being Earnest, A Trivial Comedy for Serious People 
Author: Oscar Wilde  
Date published: 1895  
Date read: December 25, 2018  
[Gutenberg Project](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/844/844-h/844-h.htm)  

When Wikipedia's article about the themes of a piece of work includes the following line, "Vice in Earnest is represented by Algy's craving for cucumber sandwiches", you know it's going to be a thrill. Certainly, this should be flagged as [citation needed] because I'm sure that while bread and butter is most certainly not a substitute for cake, cucumber sandwiches and muffins should be exchangeable.  

Honestly, there is no point in writing a review for this play. One seeks a review when there is some cost to experiencing the real thing - either time or money. _The Importance of Being Earnest_ presents neither of those two problems. One can read it for free on the Gutenberg Project in a little over an hour. Be prepared though, The Importance of Being Earnest hits you out of the gate with this exchange:  

> Algernon. Good heavens! Is marriage so demoralising as that?
>
> Lane. I believe it is a very pleasant state, sir. I have had very little experience of it myself up to the present. I have only been married once. That was in consequence of a misunderstanding between myself and a young person.
>
> Algernon. [Languidly.] I don't know that I am much interested in your family life, Lane.
>
> Lane. No, sir; it is not a very interesting subject. I never think of it myself.  

This style of witticism might not be everyone's cup of tea. But I don't think this is a sign that some people should not read The Importance of Being Earnest. In fact, I think that the people that wouldn't enjoy it would be the ones most in need of reading it. 

Every exchange, every scene is clever. Even the title is frustratingly clever. And when you have as much clever and funny packaged in a work as short as _The Importance of Being Earnest_, one can't help but gush about it. But I'll stop myself and let critic William Archer's description do that for me. He writes, "What can a poor critic do with a play which raises no principle, whether of art or morals, creates its own canons and conventions, and is nothing but an absolutely wilful expression of an irrepressibly witty personality?" If that's not a compelling enough incentive to read Oscar Wilde's ultimate work, perhaps that Wikipedia quote about cucumber sandwiches was.

#### Favorite quotes: 
> Algernon. The truth is rarely pure and never simple. Modern life would be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete impossibility!
>
> Jack. That wouldn't be at all a bad thing.
>
> Algernon. Literary criticism is not your forte, my dear fellow. Don't try it. You should leave that to people who haven't been at a University. They do it so well in the daily papers. What you really are is a Bunburyist. I was quite right in saying you were a Bunburyist. You are one of the most advanced Bunburyists I know.

> Jack. Gwendolen, it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth.  Can you forgive me?
>
> Gwendolen. I can. For I feel that you are sure to change.


