---
layout: default
title:  "2019 Reading List"
date:   2019-29-09

type:   Note
categories: reading list
---

One of my goals for 2019 is to keep better track of what I do with my time. Because I like curating my anime list so much, I figure I could do the same with books.  

### We  
Author: Yevgeny Zamyatin  
Date published: 1921  
Date read: September 29th, 2019  

A dystopian novel recommended to me by a friend. Seems to have been an inspiration to _1984_ and also _Brave New World_ among other dystopian novels. The style is a bit erratic and I had a harder time following the book, but I can definitely see how it would have been an inspiration for the books that followed it. It poses some really interesting personal and social questions that are echoed in its successors.  

### Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine  
Author: Gail Honeyman  
Date published: 2017  
Date read: September 9th, 2019  

This was a book club book that I finally got around to reading. If it hadn't been a book club book I do not think I would have made it through all the way. And I would have missed out on a deeply compelling story. Full of notes of loneliness and loss, I think the book resonated with the part of me that worries about the fragility of the social ties I've made in life. There aren't many books that I can point to that have touched on those themes in quite the same way. 

### Alice's Adventures in Wonderland  
Author: Lewis Carroll  
Date published: November 26th, 1865  
Date read: August 31st, 2019  

A classic that I finally got around to reading. Surprisingly short.

### The Screwtape Letters  
Author: C.S. Lewis  
Date published: 1942  
Date read: August 31st, 2019  

There was an offhand comment that I once read from a long forgotten place about religion that has stuck with me. It goes something like "physicists do not gather every week to affirm their belief in gravity." I grew up in a non religious household and as I have gotten older, I have interacted with a number of people's who have come to reshape my view towards religion and I have now come to respect and admire those deeply invested in their faith. Time and time again, those of Christian faith have told me to read _The Screwtape Letters_, and after a long time of having the intention to do so, I finally found the time to sit down and read it. And I have so very many thoughts. Many of them are surrounding this world of demons and devils that Screwtape's correspondence makes sound so unbelievably rich and inventive. But more importantly, I think I have come to understand why that comment that has stuck with me all this while is so contemptuous. 

_The Screwtape Letters_ talks of many things. One of them I believe is therapy. I think that religion and therapy are so similar after reading _The Screwtape Letters_ that I am unsure how I ever missed that connection. I can see how religion is not just a belief system, but it is a practice that is developed over time. It is a way of understanding your own thoughts and behaviors in ways that are productive to society. Religion can be many things, but I do not think it was anything close to what I thought of it as a child. 

### Attached  
Authors: Amir Levine and Rachel Heller  
Date published: January 5th, 2012  
Date read: July 6th, 2019  

I speed read most of the book - but still came away with an interesting perspective / dichotomy on anxiety and detachment. I'm not convinced that the book provides actionable advice or even a sound theoretical foundation to understand relationships, but it did offer some insight into anxiety in general and that might be worthwhile enough on its own.  

### The Martian  
Author: Andy Weir  
Date published: 2014  
Date read: July 6th, 2019  

Going from the dated style of Stevenson's _Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde_ to Weir's modern, informal _The Martial_ was striking. As I have begun reading more books, it is striking to me to see how writing and stories have changed over time. Stories can feel fresh after all this time and people are constantly creating newer and interesting narratives. It astonishes and awes me.  

### Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde  
Author: Robert Louis Stevenson  
Date published: January 5th, 1886  
Date read: June 25th, 2019

Book club book. You can find Nabokov's introductory analysis of the book online, which offers an interesting perspective.  

### Oryx and Crake  
Author: Margaret Atwood  
Date published: 2003  
Date read: June 18th, 2019  

I loved _Oryx and Crake_. I think it's a beautifully constructed story. I could not anticipate how the story would play out; yet, when it was all said and done, everything felt like it belonged and there was no other way to tell it. It is the kind of work that I'm not sure whether it is crafted or inspired. I loved it that much. 

### 1Q84  
Author: Haruki Murakami  
Date published: 2009-2010  
Date read: June 9th, 2019  

For other works, many people may have wildly different experiences despite reading the same story. For still others, people may all have similar experiences, but it can be hard to determine how aware of that experience the author intended when writing. With 1Q84, there can be no question because Murakami tells you as much directly. And despite this, the story still works. It speaks to Murakami's understanding of the essential elements of storytelling.  

### Stories of Your Life and Others
Author: Ted Chiang  
Date published: 2002  
Date read: April 14th, 2019  

Started out the short stories in this book a long time ago, when my friend sent me the reading for _Hell is the Absence of God_. I read a couple of the others last year. I finally finished the rest. I think I love the short story collection format because it shows the range of an author. Here, there were stories that I thought were terribly clever, mildly generic, and partially refined. The collection inspired me with its brilliance but also its foibles. 

If you have some time, I loved _Liking What You See: A Documentary_. If you do read the short stories, I also loved the Story Notes at the end, which gives some insight into the author's thoughts and inspirations. I think any amount of insight into an author's thought process is centering. 

### The Name of the Wind  
Author: Patrick Rothfuss  
Date published: March 27th, 2007  
Date read: March 29th, 2019   

I previously read _The Slow Regard of Silent Things_ without any context. So I figured it would be good to get some context on the novella by reading the story surrounding it. A fun read, even if it was a bit slower than I would have liked.  

### Modern Romance  
Author: Aziz Ansari and Eric Klinenberg  
Date published: June 16th, 2015  
Date read: March 25th, 2019  

Learned some interesting tidbits and statistics about the dating world, at least how it was in 2015.  

### Of Mice and Men  
Author: John Steinbeck  
Date published: 1937  
Date read: March 23rd, 2019  

A very tightly crafted piece with admirable symmetry. 

### Less  
Author: Andrew Sean Greer  
Date published: July 18, 2017  
Date read: March 19th, 2019  

Book club book.   

It's hard to write a funny book. It's hard to pull off a 260 page pun. _Less_ does both.  

### Never Let Me Go  
Author: Kazuo Ishiguro   
Date published: 2005   
Date read: March 8th, 2019  

A beautiful read. Full of hope and innocence and mystery and intrigue. It never quite lets you go. 

### Between the World and Me  
Author: Ta-Nehisi Coates  
Date published: July 2015  
Date read: February 22, 2019  

Book club book.  

### Blood, Sweat, and Pixels: The Triumphant, Turbulent Stories Behind How Video Games Are Made
Author: Jason Schreier  
Date published: September 5, 2017  
Date read: February 13, 2019

Video games are a big part of my life and the premise of this book was particularly intriguing. I previously interned at Activision\|Blizzard's [Infinity Ward studio](http://www.thomasjiang.com/2017/08/05/infinity-ward-postmortem.html) and there has been a [significant news](https://kotaku.com/the-fallout-of-activision-blizzard-s-massive-layoffs-1832597892) regarding them recently. It is a light, fun read with lots of little nuggets of insight. There was quite a bit in the book that reminded me of my incredibly brief time in the industry.  

### The Two--Income Trap: Why Middle-Class Parents Are (Still) Going Broke
Author: Elizabeth Warren and Amelia Warren Tyagi  
Date published: 2004 (2016 Reissue)  
Date read: February 10, 2019  

A very captivating, interesting, worrying read.

### Siddhartha 
Author: Herman Hesse  
Date published: 1922 (1951 USA)  
Date read: February 6, 2019  
[Gutenberg Project](http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/2500/pg2500.txt)   

One of my friends's favorites.

#### Interesting Quotes

> I have already learned as a child. I have known it for a long time, but I have experienced only now. And now I know it, don't just know it in my memory, but in my eyes, in my heart, in my stomach. Good for me, to know this!

> Had his father not also suffered the same pain for him, which he now suffered for his son? Had his father not long since died, alone, without having seen his son again? Did he not have to expect the same fate for himself? Was it not a comedy, a strange and stupid matter, this repetition, this running around in a fateful circle?

> Knowledge can be conveyed, but not wisdom. It can be found, it can be lived, it is possible to be carried by it, miracles can be performed with it, but it cannot be expressed in words and taught.

### The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe 
Author: C. S. Lewis   
Date published: 1950  
Date read: January 29, 2019  

C.S. Lewis has always been an author that has been present but I've never read. When I was young, The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe was immensely popular, but I never picked it up. As I got older, there was always someone in my life that was a devout Christian - one of my best friends in high school and then later, in the college, one of my college roommates, and then after I graduated, a good friend. All of them read and recommended Lewis's The Screwtape Letters. So I figured it would be appropriate, after reading Pachinko, to read The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe.

### Pachinko  
Author: Min Jin Lee   
Date published: 2017  
Date read: January 21, 2019  

This was my book club's read for January. In our discussion, we talked about identity, agency, and compatibility. For a book that covers so many people, so many generations, and so many situations, it would be interesting to look at how efficient Min Jin Lee is in her writing to cover all of these topics.

### The Awakening
Author: Kate Chopin  
Date published: 1899  
Date read: January 6, 2019  
[Gutenberg Project](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/160/160-h/160-h.htm)  

I was thinking about how to write compelling dialogue, a difficult problem for anyone just starting to pen their masterpiece, and was particularly keen on observing the dialogue in this piece. I have no idea whether _The Awakening_ stands out in particular for its dialogue. More certainly, it is the feminist social commentary that has blessed the work with its longevity and cultural prestige. 

Two works that I think to be read in comparison to _The Awakening_ are [_The Story of an Hour (1894)_](https://archive.vcu.edu/english/engweb/webtexts/hour/), a Chopin short story, and Tolstoy's [Anna Karenina](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1399/1399-h/1399-h.htm). I think the three are strikingly similar. 

#### Interesting Quotes

> [Mademoiselle Reisz] "Why?" asked her companion. "Why do you love him when you ought not to?" 
>
> Edna, with a motion or two, dragged herself on her knees before Mademoiselle Reisz, who took the glowing face between her two hands. 
>
> "Why? Because his hair is brown and grows away from his temples; because he opens and shuts his eyes, and his nose is a little out of drawing; because he has two lips and square chin, and a little finger which he can't straighten from having played baseball too energetically in his youth. Because--"
>
> "Because you do, in short," laughed Mademoiselle.

> Furthermore, in one of the daily papers appeared a brief notice to the effect that Mr. and Mrs. Pontellier were contemplating a summer sojourn abroad, and that their handsome residence on Esplanade Street was undergoing sumptuous alterations, and would not be ready for occupancy until their return. Mr. Pontellier had saved appearances!

> It was not that she dwelt upon details of their acquaintance, or recalled in any special or peculiar way his personality; it was his being, his existence, which dominated her thoughts, fading sometimes as if it would melt into the mist of the forgotten, reviving again with an intensity which filled her with an incomprehensible longing.

### The Importance of Being Earnest, A Trivial Comedy for Serious People 
Author: Oscar Wilde  
Date published: 1895  
Date read: December 25, 2018  
[Gutenberg Project](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/844/844-h/844-h.htm)  

When Wikipedia's article about the themes of a piece of work includes the following line, "Vice in Earnest is represented by Algy's craving for cucumber sandwiches", you know it's going to be a thrill. Certainly, this should be flagged as [citation needed] because I'm sure that while bread and butter is most certainly not a substitute for cake, cucumber sandwiches and muffins should be exchangeable.  

Honestly, there is no point in writing a review for this play. One seeks a review when there is some cost to experiencing the real thing - either time or money. _The Importance of Being Earnest_ presents neither of those two problems. One can read it for free on the Gutenberg Project in a little over an hour. Be prepared though, The Importance of Being Earnest hits you out of the gate with this exchange:  

> Algernon. Good heavens! Is marriage so demoralising as that?
>
> Lane. I believe it is a very pleasant state, sir. I have had very little experience of it myself up to the present. I have only been married once. That was in consequence of a misunderstanding between myself and a young person.
>
> Algernon. [Languidly.] I don't know that I am much interested in your family life, Lane.
>
> Lane. No, sir; it is not a very interesting subject. I never think of it myself.  

This style of witticism might not be everyone's cup of tea. But I don't think this is a sign that some people should not read The Importance of Being Earnest. In fact, I think that the people that wouldn't enjoy it would be the ones most in need of reading it. 

Every exchange, every scene is clever. Even the title is frustratingly clever. And when you have as much clever and funny packaged in a work as short as _The Importance of Being Earnest_, one can't help but gush about it. But I'll stop myself and let critic William Archer's description do that for me. He writes, "What can a poor critic do with a play which raises no principle, whether of art or morals, creates its own canons and conventions, and is nothing but an absolutely wilful expression of an irrepressibly witty personality?" If that's not a compelling enough incentive to read Oscar Wilde's ultimate work, perhaps that Wikipedia quote about cucumber sandwiches was.

#### Favorite quotes: 
> Algernon. The truth is rarely pure and never simple. Modern life would be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete impossibility!
>
> Jack. That wouldn't be at all a bad thing.
>
> Algernon. Literary criticism is not your forte, my dear fellow. Don't try it. You should leave that to people who haven't been at a University. They do it so well in the daily papers. What you really are is a Bunburyist. I was quite right in saying you were a Bunburyist. You are one of the most advanced Bunburyists I know.

> Jack. Gwendolen, it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth.  Can you forgive me?
>
> Gwendolen. I can. For I feel that you are sure to change.


