---
layout: default
title:  "2020 Reading List"
date:   2020-05-19

type:   Note
---

I was pretty good about keeping up reading last year. Let's see if we can keep it up this year.

### Spinning Silver  
Author: Naomi Novik  
Date published: 2018  
Date read: May 20, 2020  

Recently, I have been watching Hikaru Nakamura stream and play chess online. Hikaru accounts for chess novices like myself by orienting his commentary towards more basic chess notions, such as pins, forks, and other tactics rather than more serious named openings like the Sicilian Defense. But perhaps the most entrancing games, the ones that keep me mesmerized, are the Odds games. An Odds game is one in which one player begins down material, perhaps with the queen removed or the two rooks or any combination of pieces removed. It strikes me as miraculous that one could win from such a position. If the opponent took only even trades (my bishop for your bishop), they would come out ahead. But Hikaru manages to win. It is possible because chess is a hard game and chess is a hard game because it is easy to make mistakes. Mistakes that allow your opponent, who is inherently weaker, to win material slowly but surely, until the tides have turned and the power imbalance is flipped the other way. 

_Spinning Silver_'s strongest theme is that its strong female leads are all playing Odds games. Each one begin from a position of inherent weakness, and each one strategizes, bargains, and maneuvers their position to power. And although this emphasis on strong female leads is overwhelmingly conspicuous, I don't mind it in the least. For when I was younger, I was incredibly dense. Certainly more dense than others my age. And especially when it came to reading. And I would have needed at least the level of intentionality demonstrated here in order to derive the useful lesson at the heart of this story. There are Odds games in life, and if you think harder than your opponents, it is possible to overcome them. 

### Exhalation: Stories  
Author: Ted Chiang  
Date published: May 7, 2019  
Date read: April 26, 2020  

Some have compared Ted Chiang's stories to riddles. They are closer to reverse riddles. Rather than hiding the trick (it was an icicle) and asking one to work backwards to the consequences, Ted Chiang is upfront about the trick - this door accesses time 5 seconds ago, this device enables communication between parallel universes, this technology enables perfect memory - and asks what the consequences are.

The stories are narratively tight. They encapsulate small corners of big universes. There are a few words spent on the universe and many words spent on the small corners. And the stories almost always end up where they started and are all worth reading.  

### The Three-Body Problem (三体)  
Author: Liu Cixin (刘慈欣)  
Translator: Ken Liu  
Date published: 2008 (En: 2014)  
Date read: April 19, 2020  

A work of raw imagination. While it lacks the subtlety of Ishiguro's _Never Let Me Go_ or the bewilderment of Murakami's _IQ84_, _The Three-Body Problem_ makes amends through its extensive portrayal of science and inventive devices to give those theories narrative gravity. There is much to admire about the direct approach that Liu Cixin employs to tell a multifaceted story.   

### The Road  
Author: Cormac McCarthy  
Date published: September 26, 2006  
Date read: January 20, 2020  

Cormac McCarthy was inspired by the hills of Texas to write _The Road_ and I just happened to be traveling to Houston at the time I read the book. My college friends and I visited the Space Center, which reminded me of _The Martian_ by Andy Weir. I was also reminded of _The Left Hand of Darkness_, which my friends and I are reading for book club. While both of those books feature extended parts of grueling survival travel, _The Road_ distinguishes itself by being a hopeless one. There is no end goal. It is the constant struggle of survival combined with the oppressive despair that makes _The Road_ a marvel to read. McCarthy mixes grief, despondency, love and wonder together in a way that makes knowing that death is unavoidable somehow okay in the end. 


### Nine Stories  
Author: J.D. Salinger   
Date published: 1953  
Date read: January 13, 2020  

Dan Harmon, the creator of Community, talks about the basic structure that stories follow. It has eight parts, and it goes like this:  

1. A character is in a zone of comfort  
2. But they want something  
3. They enter an unfamiliar situation  
4. Adapt to it  
5. Get what they wanted  
6. Pay a heavy price for it  
7. Then return to their familiar situation  
8. Having changed.  

Dan writes,

> Realize that it's hardwired into your nervous system, and trust that in a vacuum, raised by wolves, your stories would follow this pattern.   

And if you've read Chekhov, an acclaimed master of the short story, you can see this pattern in action. Sure, the subject matter, situation, premise at hand varies wildly and the packaging is fresh each time, but at the end of the day, Chekhov's stories _feel_ complete and whole. With Salinger, I felt like most stories left me with a sense of incompleteness. Not necessarily because his stories don't necessary follow this pattern. Some do and reek of being excerpts instead of chapters of his characters' lives.

Unsurprisingly, my favorite from his collection was also the most complete- _For Esme with Love and Squalor_. It's a touching story of compassion and it makes you feel that mysterious sense of belonging which can escape everyone. 

But stories like _Pretty Mouth and Green My Eyes_ and _A Perfect Day for Bananafish_ tick the other way, squirreling themselves into your mind for differing reasons. 

It's hard to get a complete sense of Salinger from the lot of these stories, but reading a single one is enough to get a concrete read of who Salinger is and where he comes from. 


### The Left Hand of Darkness   
Author: Ursula K. Le Guin  
Date published: March 1969  
Date read: January 5, 2020  

Book club book. It's of a much different form than one might expect from a science fiction book. It's more alien political and cultural understanding than action. Even though those aspects, which drive most of the plot, do not need to be set in a science fiction world, there are other elements that demand the setting. Which I think separates out this sort of book from other science fiction books. There's just more happening in this one. There's more to discover, to imaginate, to learn about of this world.

I'll pull excerpts out of [this review](https://lithub.com/how-the-left-hand-of-darkness-changed-everything/) that describe it better.

> There were no lasers, no damsels, no chosen ones. There was war, yes, but a real war, a war not for the fate of the galaxy but for hatred and fear (things that rang true while living in America in late 2001). There was science, too, but it wasn't the science of physics or technology. It was the science of culture. The science of bodies. 

> Another duality--and again another, in that this book is both about gender and not about gender at all. 

> Genly knows he needs to unpack his biases. He spends the entire book trying to do just that.

The book is subtle in the way that many science fiction books are not. I do not read subtle items very well which made _The Left Hand of Darkness_ more challenging. 

I think that society has changed since it's original publication, but I do not think that those changes have made the book less relevant--perhaps only more subtle.

