---
layout: default
title: "2020 Reading List"
date: 2020-10-08

type: Note
---

I was pretty good about keeping up reading last year. Let's see if we can keep it up this year.

### Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game

Author: Michael Lewis  
Published: June 17, 2003  
Read: October 8, 2020

_Moneyball_ is a fantasy work. I do not mean this disparingly, in fact, quite the opposite. My personal experience with the game of baseball consists wholly of throwing a ball around with a neighbor once, watching a professional game in a field trip to Atlanta, and briefly discussing the subject with my college roommate. But _Moneyball_ isn't a book about sports for sports people. _Moneyball_ is a book for nerds. And even better than a book for nerds, it is a fantasy book for nerds. It glorifies the statistically inclined and features the overlooked academics overthrowing an old boys' club. _Moneyball_ could have been a relatively straightforward analysis of the game of baseball and the Oakland A's strategy for constructing a team. Thanks to _Moneyball_, we know this strategy would not be very successful.

> In 1978, James came out with a second book, and this time, before entering his discussion, he checked his modesty at the door. The book was titled _1978 Baseball Abstract: The 2nd Annual Edition of Baseball’s Most Informative and Imaginative Review_. “I would like to produce here the most complex, detailed, and comprehensive picture of the game of baseball available anywhere,” he wrote, “and I would like to avoid repeating anything that has ever been written before.”
>
> Word had spread this time: 250 people bought a copy. To an author who viewed a sale of 75 copies as encouragement, the sale of 250 was a bonanza. James’s pen was now an unstoppable force.

Instead of a document for geeks entitled, for instance _A Study of Sabermetrics in Major League Baseball_, (apologies to Jason Chang and Joshua Zenilman), Lewis left the bulk of the statistics at the door and instead concentrated on the power of story. By focusing on individual people, their surroundings, their background, their thoughts and feelings, _Moneyball_ has all the heroes, lore, tradition, defeat, underdogs that any fantasy writer would hope to include. Consider the emotional weight added to the method of player selection that the A's begin using:

> As the thirty-fifth pick approaches, Erik once again leans into the speaker phone. If he leaned in just a bit more closely he might hear phones around the league clicking off, so that people could laugh without being heard. For they do laugh. They will make fun of what the A’s are about to do; and there will be a lesson in that. The inability to envision a certain kind of person doing a certain kind of thing because you’ve never seen someone who looks like him do it before is not just a vice. It’s a luxury. What begins as a failure of the imagination ends as a market inefficiency: when you rule out an entire class of people from doing a job simply by their appearance, you are less likely to find the person for the job.

There's a certain power to language and storytelling here which is certainly no surprise to anyone reading the book. Lewis writes

> Established closers were systematically overpriced, in large part because of the statistic by which closers were judged in the marketplace: “saves.” The very word made the guy who achieved them sound vitally important. But the situation typically described by the save--the bases empty in the ninth inning with the team leading--was clearly far less critical than a lot of other situations pitchers faced. The closer’s statistic did not have the power of language; it was just a number.

### In God We Trust: All Others Pay Cash

Author: Jean Shepherd  
Published: October 1966  
Read: September 28, 2020

I love the conceit of the book, in which the narrator returns home to his small Indiana hometown, meets an old friend and begins reminiscing.

> He had drawn a beer for himself and another for me, broken out a bag pretzels, and we began to do some really good, slid Whatever-happened-to ...?, Did-she-ever-marry ...?, When-did-they-put-on-the-bowling-alley-down-at ...?, and all the rest of it.

I love it in part because its so familiar. The book perfectly captures my experience returning to my small Indiana hometown and meeting with my old friends and reminiscing. Both Shepherd and I love to exaggerate and embellish for entertainment purposes and tell stories of our misadventures.

> To begin with, heat, in Indiana, is something else again. It descends like a 300-pound fat lady onto a picnic bench in the middle of July. It can literally be sliced into chunks and stored away in the basement to use in winter; on cold days you just bring it out and turn it on. Indiana heat is not a meteorological phenomenon--it is a solid element something you can grab by the handles.

Shepherd just happens to be more compelling of a storyteller than I. For instance, his description of mosquitoes doesn't accurately portray the reality of Indiana, it merely accurately portrays the feeling of Indiana.

> Everyone is coated with an inch and half of something called citronella, reputedly a mosquito repellent but actually a sort of mosquito salad dressing.

The entire book is firmly grounded in Indiana. Shepherd even sneaks in a mention of euchre, to firmly establish his Indiana credentials.

But perhaps the most familiar aspect of the whole book is the feeling Shepherd captures of being someone who grew up and then left. Every time I return or talk to someone else from home, there's this strange tension between the warm attachment I have for my hometown and the aversion to its humbleness. Or as Shepherd describes,

> Inwardly I shuddered, realizing how narrowly I had missed being one of the boys myself, forever doomed to the Sheet Mill where I had once spent a few harrowing centuries one summer.

### Open

Author: Andre Agassi (in collaboration with John Joseph Moehringer)  
Published: August 10th, 2010  
Read: September 2rd, 2020

I don't know anything about tennis and I did not know who Andre Agassi was; yet I flew through _Open_ in two afternoons. It didn't matter that I did not understand tennis because _Open_ is about Andre's relationships. The relationship he had with his trainer, his coach, his girlfriends, his rivals, and most importantly, his relationship with the game of tennis.

> I play tennis for a living, even though I hate tennis, hate it with a dark and secret passion, and always have.

Yet despite Andre's supposed hate of the game, Andre can't stop playing. Andre's polarized, contradictory relationship with the game evokes a certain admiration and jealousy from me, for reasons that I need to sort out with a therapist. But I love it nonetheless. It reminds me of a similar sentiment from Vonnegut's _Slapstick_,

> He asked me politely how my work was going. I think he respects but is baffled by my work.
>
> I said that I was sick of it, but that I had always been sick of it. I told him a remark which I had heard attributed to the writer Renata Adler, who hates writing, that a writer was a person who hated writing.
>
> I told him too, what my agent, Max Wilkinson, wrote to me after I complained again about what a disagreeable profession I had. This was it: "Dear Kurt--I never knew a blacksmith who was in love with his anvil."
>
> We laughed again, but I think the joke was partly lost on my brother. His life has been an unending honeymoon with his anvil.

To me, there's something intimate about these admissions that forms a kinship with their authors. But as Andre notes in the end, his autobiography is highly edited, even if it feels off the cuff, intimate, unfiltered. There are the little literary flourishes that are included. Andre loves the immediate callback. After a hard loss, Andre says,

> Without thinking, I begin lighting things on fire. Paper, clothes, shoes. For years this has been one of my furtive ways of coping with extreme stress. I don't do it consciously. An impulse comes over me and I reach of the matches.

Later on in the chapter, after describing a painful series of tournament losses, he writes,

> Even though I'm a punching bad for sportswriters, big companies beg me to pose with their products. In the middle of 1989 one of my corporate sponsors, Canon, schedules a series of photo shoots, including one in the wilds of Nevada, in the Valley of Fire. I like the sound of that. I walk every day through a valley of fire.

There must be like a tennis volley. Ideas get tossed back and forth in quick succession. In the end, I don't mind that the carefully edited sense of fellowship because of how good the book is.

### My Youth Romantic Comedy is Wrong, as I Expected (Vol 1) (やはり俺の青春ラブコメはまちがっている)

Author: Wataru Watari  
Illustration: Ponkan8  
Published: 2011 (2016 English)  
Read: September 1st, 2020

I have been rewatching the anime with friends and picked up the light novel to compliment the viewing. So it's the third time I've been exposed to the material at hand. I'm actually very impressed by the anime adaptation of the source material. They take liberty in editing and cutting out material, but I think they did a great job in keeping the essential elements and trimming the rest.

I do like the afterword the author leaves for us.

> Real youth is when two guys stop by a fast-food joint like Saizeriya after school and loiter around until evening, surviving only on fountain drinks and focaccia, desperately bad-mouthing people and complaining about school to kill time. Stuff like that. That is the real teen experience. I've gone through it myself, so it's absolutely true.

I guess _Daily Lives of High School Boys_ is more accurate to that version of life than _My Youth_. Still, for how many interesting takes and jumps the light novel has, the author seems surprisingly grounded.

### Arguing with Zombies: Economics, Politics, and the Fight for a Better Future

Author: Paul Krugman  
Published: January 2020  
Read: August 25th, 2020

In thinking about this book, I think that one way to talk about books and writing in general is to discuss two primary aspects, its content and its presentation. While this might be a fairly obvious dichotomy, it is a helpful mental guidepost.

### The Fat Years (盛世 中国 2013 年)

Author: Chan Koonchung (陈冠中)  
Translator: Michael S. Duke  
Published: 2009  
Read: August 11th, 2020

At its heart, _The Fat Years_ is political commentary and prediction. Elements of science fiction and romance and bits of plot and character development give the work a thin enough veneer to masquerade as fiction rather than a lengthy op-ed. However, despite being the most upfront of the works of political criticism I have read, it somehow reads as the least critical. At the end of _1984_, the totalitarian government betrays, tortures and breaks our protagonist. At the end of _Brave New World_, the savage hangs himself to free himself from the World State. At the end of _The Fat Years_, all of our characters continue their average lives in the high functioning socialist market economy of China. Although the novel itself lacking all subtlety - the characters declare their feelings directly on the page with no subtext - the extremely mild criticism of China's government may be, unexpectedly, intentional.

After all, unlike in the other dystopias, the government described in _The Fat Years_ is not significantly different from the government that exists today. There is no genetic engineering happening as happened in _Oryx and Crake_ and there is no revolutionary event as in _The Handmaid's Tale_. Thus, _The Fat Years_ feels not like a portrayal of the result of falling down a slippery slope, but rather like the next little tumble down that same slope. And if I am able to look at the world of _The Fat Years_ and remark that it seems perfectly acceptable - then perhaps that is the concern that Koonchung is attempting to highlight. If only that were as direct as the other elements of the book.

### Slapstick or Lonesome No More!

Author: Kurt Vonnegut  
Published: 1976  
Read: July 31st, 2020

_Slapstick_ may be the first Vonnegut that clicked for me. I had read _Slaughthouse 5_, which falls between _Breakfast of Champions_, which went completely over my head, and _Cat's Cradle_ and _Player Piano_, which I both thought were interesting but did not burrow into my mind. But _Slapstick_ was different. I think in part because it was autobiographical, or as close to it as Vonnegut allowed himself to be. But despite this, I would not blindly recommend this book to everyone. I've met many people that would read and understand it - but it just wouldn't click with them. But even to those people, I think I would recommend Vonnegut's prologue.

The prologue, like the rest of the novel, is wonderful and funny. But it is so concise that I think the time would be well spent for anyone. And it peeks into Vonnegut's psyche

> For my own part, though: It would have been catastrophic if I had forgotten my sister at once. I had never told her so, but she was the person I had always written for. She was the secret of whatever artistic unit I had ever achieved. She was the secret of my technique. Any creation which has any wholeness and harmoniousness, I suspect, was made by an artist or inventor with an audience of one in mind.

I don't think this last sentence holds true universally, but it clearly was true of _Slapstick_.

### Dune

Author: Frank Herbert  
Published: August 1, 1965  
Read: June 25th, 2020

_Dune_ reads like a solid science fiction/fantasy book. It is grand in scope with its interplanetary empires and political scheming, fantastical in spirit with its sharp environments and prophetic visions, and personal in touch with its sound relationships. Perhaps that is sufficient enough praise for a book that, despite its age, stands tall among the contemporary counterparts that were allowed to be inspired by it. It is hard to read _Dune_ without drawing immediate contrast to the science fiction/fantasy works that have come after it, but at the time, it is possible for me to imagine that _Dune_ registered at a different level. After all, _Dune_ has wormed its way into all facets of culture.

### Bobby Fischer Teaches Chess

Author: Bobby Fischer, Stuart Margulies, Don Mosenfelder  
Published: 1966  
Read: June 14th, 2020

Due to my recent chess interest, I picked up this book, which is very accessible and meant for chess casuals and newcomers. The most interesting part of this book is actually the physical layout of the book. You are meant to read only the page on the right. Thus, on the back of each page (or the left page when the book is open), the text is printed upside down. This way, when you have read only the right page through the book, you flip the book around and continue reading on only the right page from the end back to the beginning. Incredibly smart layout.

### Kafkaesque: Fourteen Stories

Author: Peter Kuper  
Published: 2018  
Read: June 3rd, 2020

Kafkaesque is used to describe a scenario that is complex, bizarre, or illogical. At this moment in time, when protests are erupting in hundreds of cities across the United States during a time marked by pandemic and quarantines, the world seems to resemble Kafka more and more. Kafka is upsetting timely for the moment, but I also found uncomfortable fraternity in Kafka's more personal Kafkaian labyrinths. _From Give It Up!_ to _A Hunger Artist_, Kafka could not be more depressing or more relevant to the world or to me than at this moment.

Peter Kuper's interpretation of Kafka's flash fiction makes Kafkaesque: Fourteen Stories the absolute best way to be introduced to Kafka. If I could redo my introduction to Kafka - I would not have read The Metamorphosis or attempted reading The Trial until having first been introduced to Kafka through his flash fiction and Kuper's interpretation of it.

Special thanks to my friend Caro for gifting me this book for Secret Santa last year!

### Spinning Silver

Author: Naomi Novik  
Date published: 2018  
Date read: May 20, 2020

Recently, I have been watching Hikaru Nakamura stream and play chess online. Hikaru accounts for chess novices like myself by orienting his commentary towards more basic chess notions, such as pins, forks, and other tactics rather than more serious named openings like the Sicilian Defense. But perhaps the most entrancing games, the ones that keep me mesmerized, are the Odds games. An Odds game is one in which one player begins down material, perhaps with the queen removed or the two rooks or any combination of pieces removed. It strikes me as miraculous that one could win from such a position. If the opponent took only even trades (my bishop for your bishop), they would come out ahead. But Hikaru manages to win. It is possible because chess is a hard game and chess is a hard game because it is easy to make mistakes. Mistakes that allow your opponent, who is inherently weaker, to win material slowly but surely, until the tides have turned and the power imbalance is flipped the other way.

_Spinning Silver_'s strongest theme is that its strong female leads are all playing Odds games. Each one begin from a position of inherent weakness, and each one strategizes, bargains, and maneuvers their position to power. And although this emphasis on strong female leads is overwhelmingly conspicuous, I don't mind it in the least. For when I was younger, I was incredibly dense. Certainly more dense than others my age. And especially when it came to reading. And I would have needed at least the level of intentionality demonstrated here in order to derive the useful lesson at the heart of this story. There are Odds games in life, and if you think harder than your opponents, it is possible to overcome them.

### Exhalation: Stories

Author: Ted Chiang  
Date published: May 7, 2019  
Date read: April 26, 2020

Some have compared Ted Chiang's stories to riddles. They are closer to reverse riddles. Rather than hiding the trick (it was an icicle) and asking one to work backwards to the consequences, Ted Chiang is upfront about the trick - this door accesses time 5 seconds ago, this device enables communication between parallel universes, this technology enables perfect memory - and asks what the consequences are.

The stories are narratively tight. They encapsulate small corners of big universes. There are a few words spent on the universe and many words spent on the small corners. And the stories almost always end up where they started and are all worth reading.

### The Three-Body Problem (三体)

Author: Liu Cixin (刘慈欣)  
Translator: Ken Liu  
Date published: 2008 (En: 2014)  
Date read: April 19, 2020

A work of raw imagination. While it lacks the subtlety of Ishiguro's _Never Let Me Go_ or the bewilderment of Murakami's _IQ84_, _The Three-Body Problem_ makes amends through its extensive portrayal of science and inventive devices to give those theories narrative gravity. There is much to admire about the direct approach that Liu Cixin employs to tell a multifaceted story.

### The Road

Author: Cormac McCarthy  
Date published: September 26, 2006  
Date read: January 20, 2020

Cormac McCarthy was inspired by the hills of Texas to write _The Road_ and I just happened to be traveling to Houston at the time I read the book. My college friends and I visited the Space Center, which reminded me of _The Martian_ by Andy Weir. I was also reminded of _The Left Hand of Darkness_, which my friends and I are reading for book club. While both of those books feature extended parts of grueling survival travel, _The Road_ distinguishes itself by being a hopeless one. There is no end goal. It is the constant struggle of survival combined with the oppressive despair that makes _The Road_ a marvel to read. McCarthy mixes grief, despondency, love and wonder together in a way that makes knowing that death is unavoidable somehow okay in the end.

### Nine Stories

Author: J.D. Salinger  
Date published: 1953  
Date read: January 13, 2020

Dan Harmon, the creator of Community, talks about the basic structure that stories follow. It has eight parts, and it goes like this:

1. A character is in a zone of comfort
2. But they want something
3. They enter an unfamiliar situation
4. Adapt to it
5. Get what they wanted
6. Pay a heavy price for it
7. Then return to their familiar situation
8. Having changed.

Dan writes,

> Realize that it's hardwired into your nervous system, and trust that in a vacuum, raised by wolves, your stories would follow this pattern.

And if you've read Chekhov, an acclaimed master of the short story, you can see this pattern in action. Sure, the subject matter, situation, premise at hand varies wildly and the packaging is fresh each time, but at the end of the day, Chekhov's stories _feel_ complete and whole. With Salinger, I felt like most stories left me with a sense of incompleteness. Not necessarily because his stories don't necessary follow this pattern. Some do and reek of being excerpts instead of chapters of his characters' lives.

Unsurprisingly, my favorite from his collection was also the most complete- _For Esme with Love and Squalor_. It's a touching story of compassion and it makes you feel that mysterious sense of belonging which can escape everyone.

But stories like _Pretty Mouth and Green My Eyes_ and _A Perfect Day for Bananafish_ tick the other way, squirreling themselves into your mind for differing reasons.

It's hard to get a complete sense of Salinger from the lot of these stories, but reading a single one is enough to get a concrete read of who Salinger is and where he comes from.

### The Left Hand of Darkness

Author: Ursula K. Le Guin  
Date published: March 1969  
Date read: January 5, 2020

Book club book. It's of a much different form than one might expect from a science fiction book. It's more alien political and cultural understanding than action. Even though those aspects, which drive most of the plot, do not need to be set in a science fiction world, there are other elements that demand the setting. Which I think separates out this sort of book from other science fiction books. There's just more happening in this one. There's more to discover, to imaginate, to learn about of this world.

I'll pull excerpts out of [this review](https://lithub.com/how-the-left-hand-of-darkness-changed-everything/) that describe it better.

> There were no lasers, no damsels, no chosen ones. There was war, yes, but a real war, a war not for the fate of the galaxy but for hatred and fear (things that rang true while living in America in late 2001). There was science, too, but it wasn't the science of physics or technology. It was the science of culture. The science of bodies.

> Another duality--and again another, in that this book is both about gender and not about gender at all.

> Genly knows he needs to unpack his biases. He spends the entire book trying to do just that.

The book is subtle in the way that many science fiction books are not. I do not read subtle items very well which made _The Left Hand of Darkness_ more challenging.

I think that society has changed since it's original publication, but I do not think that those changes have made the book less relevant--perhaps only more subtle.
