---
layout: default
title:  "2020 Reading List"
date:   2020-07-31

type:   Note
---

I was pretty good about keeping up reading last year. Let's see if we can keep it up this year.

### The Fat Years (盛世 中国 2013年)  
Author: Chan Koonchung (陈冠中)  
Translator: Michael S. Duke  
Published: 2009  
Read: August 11th, 2020  

At its heart, _The Fat Years_ is political commentary and prediction. Elements of science fiction and romance and bits of plot and character development give the work a thin enough veneer to masquerade as fiction rather than a lengthy op-ed. However, despite being the most upfront of the works of political criticism I have read, it somehow reads as the least critical. At the end of _1984_, the totalitarian government betrays, tortures and breaks our protagonist. At the end of _Brave New World_, the savage hangs himself to free himself from the World State. At the end of _The Fat Years_, all of our characters continue their average lives in the high functioning socialist market economy of China. Although the novel itself lacking all subtlety - the characters declare their feelings directly on the page with no subtext - the extremely mild criticism of China's government may be, unexpectedly, intentional. 

After all, unlike in the other dystopias, the government described in _The Fat Years_ is not significantly different from the government that exists today. There is no genetic engineering happening as happened in _Oryx and Crake_ and there is no revolutionary event as in _The Handmaid's Tale_. Thus, _The Fat Years_ feels not like a portrayal of the result of falling down a slippery slope, but rather like the next little tumble down that same slope. And if I am able to look at the world of _The Fat Years_ and remark that it seems perfectly acceptable - then perhaps that is the concern that Koonchung is attempting to highlight. If only that were as direct as the other elements of the book.  

### Slapstick or Lonesome No More!  
Author: Kurt Vonnegut  
Published: 1976  
Read: July 31st, 2020  

_Slapstick_ may be the first Vonnegut that clicked for me. I had read _Slaughthouse 5_, which falls between _Breakfast of Champions_, which went completely over my head, and _Cat's Cradle_ and _Player Piano_, which I both thought were interesting but did not burrow into my mind. But _Slapstick_ was different. I think in part because it was autobiographical, or as close to it as Vonnegut allowed himself to be. But despite this, I would not blindly recommend this book to everyone. I've met many people that would read and understand it - but it just wouldn't click with them. But even to those people, I think I would recommend Vonnegut's prologue. 

The prologue, like the rest of the novel, is wonderful and funny. But it is so concise that I think the time would be well spent for anyone. And it peeks into Vonnegut's psyche

> For my own part, though: It would have been catastrophic if I had forgotten my sister at once. I had never told her so, but she was the person I had always written for. She was the secret of whatever artistic unit I had ever achieved. She was the secret of my technique. Any creation which has any wholeness and harmoniousness, I suspect, was made by an artist or inventor with an audience of one in mind. 

I don't think this last sentence holds true universally, but it clearly was true of _Slapstick_.  

### Dune  
Author: Frank Herbert  
Published: August 1, 1965  
Read: June 25th, 2020  

_Dune_ reads like a solid science fiction/fantasy book. It is grand in scope with its interplanetary empires and political scheming, fantastical in spirit with its sharp environments and prophetic visions, and personal in touch with its sound relationships. Perhaps that is sufficient enough praise for a book that, despite its age, stands tall among the contemporary counterparts that were allowed to be inspired by it. It is hard to read _Dune_ without drawing immediate contrast to the science fiction/fantasy works that have come after it, but at the time, it is possible for me to imagine that _Dune_ registered at a different level. After all, _Dune_ has wormed its way into all facets of culture.  

### Bobby Fischer Teaches Chess  
Author: Bobby Fischer, Stuart Margulies, Don Mosenfelder  
Published: 1966  
Read: June 14th, 2020  

Due to my recent chess interest, I picked up this book, which is very accessible and meant for chess casuals and newcomers. The most interesting part of this book is actually the physical layout of the book. You are meant to read only the page on the right. Thus, on the back of each page (or the left page when the book is open), the text is printed upside down. This way, when you have read only the right page through the book, you flip the book around and continue reading on only the right page from the end back to the beginning. Incredibly smart layout.   

### Kafkaesque: Fourteen Stories  
Author: Peter Kuper  
Published: 2018  
Read: June 3rd, 2020  

Kafkaesque is used to describe a scenario that is complex, bizarre, or illogical. At this moment in time, when protests are erupting in hundreds of cities across the United States during a time marked by pandemic and quarantines, the world seems to resemble Kafka more and more. Kafka is upsetting timely for the moment, but I also found uncomfortable fraternity in Kafka's more personal Kafkaian labyrinths. _From Give It Up!_ to _A Hunger Artist_, Kafka could not be more depressing or more relevant to the world or to me than at this moment.  

Peter Kuper's interpretation of Kafka's flash fiction makes Kafkaesque: Fourteen Stories the absolute best way to be introduced to Kafka. If I could redo my introduction to Kafka - I would not have read The Metamorphosis or attempted reading The Trial until having first been introduced to Kafka through his flash fiction and Kuper's interpretation of it.  

Special thanks to my friend Caro for gifting me this book for Secret Santa last year!

### Spinning Silver  
Author: Naomi Novik  
Date published: 2018  
Date read: May 20, 2020  

Recently, I have been watching Hikaru Nakamura stream and play chess online. Hikaru accounts for chess novices like myself by orienting his commentary towards more basic chess notions, such as pins, forks, and other tactics rather than more serious named openings like the Sicilian Defense. But perhaps the most entrancing games, the ones that keep me mesmerized, are the Odds games. An Odds game is one in which one player begins down material, perhaps with the queen removed or the two rooks or any combination of pieces removed. It strikes me as miraculous that one could win from such a position. If the opponent took only even trades (my bishop for your bishop), they would come out ahead. But Hikaru manages to win. It is possible because chess is a hard game and chess is a hard game because it is easy to make mistakes. Mistakes that allow your opponent, who is inherently weaker, to win material slowly but surely, until the tides have turned and the power imbalance is flipped the other way. 

_Spinning Silver_'s strongest theme is that its strong female leads are all playing Odds games. Each one begin from a position of inherent weakness, and each one strategizes, bargains, and maneuvers their position to power. And although this emphasis on strong female leads is overwhelmingly conspicuous, I don't mind it in the least. For when I was younger, I was incredibly dense. Certainly more dense than others my age. And especially when it came to reading. And I would have needed at least the level of intentionality demonstrated here in order to derive the useful lesson at the heart of this story. There are Odds games in life, and if you think harder than your opponents, it is possible to overcome them. 

### Exhalation: Stories  
Author: Ted Chiang  
Date published: May 7, 2019  
Date read: April 26, 2020  

Some have compared Ted Chiang's stories to riddles. They are closer to reverse riddles. Rather than hiding the trick (it was an icicle) and asking one to work backwards to the consequences, Ted Chiang is upfront about the trick - this door accesses time 5 seconds ago, this device enables communication between parallel universes, this technology enables perfect memory - and asks what the consequences are.

The stories are narratively tight. They encapsulate small corners of big universes. There are a few words spent on the universe and many words spent on the small corners. And the stories almost always end up where they started and are all worth reading.  

### The Three-Body Problem (三体)  
Author: Liu Cixin (刘慈欣)  
Translator: Ken Liu  
Date published: 2008 (En: 2014)  
Date read: April 19, 2020  

A work of raw imagination. While it lacks the subtlety of Ishiguro's _Never Let Me Go_ or the bewilderment of Murakami's _IQ84_, _The Three-Body Problem_ makes amends through its extensive portrayal of science and inventive devices to give those theories narrative gravity. There is much to admire about the direct approach that Liu Cixin employs to tell a multifaceted story.   

### The Road  
Author: Cormac McCarthy  
Date published: September 26, 2006  
Date read: January 20, 2020  

Cormac McCarthy was inspired by the hills of Texas to write _The Road_ and I just happened to be traveling to Houston at the time I read the book. My college friends and I visited the Space Center, which reminded me of _The Martian_ by Andy Weir. I was also reminded of _The Left Hand of Darkness_, which my friends and I are reading for book club. While both of those books feature extended parts of grueling survival travel, _The Road_ distinguishes itself by being a hopeless one. There is no end goal. It is the constant struggle of survival combined with the oppressive despair that makes _The Road_ a marvel to read. McCarthy mixes grief, despondency, love and wonder together in a way that makes knowing that death is unavoidable somehow okay in the end. 


### Nine Stories  
Author: J.D. Salinger   
Date published: 1953  
Date read: January 13, 2020  

Dan Harmon, the creator of Community, talks about the basic structure that stories follow. It has eight parts, and it goes like this:  

1. A character is in a zone of comfort  
2. But they want something  
3. They enter an unfamiliar situation  
4. Adapt to it  
5. Get what they wanted  
6. Pay a heavy price for it  
7. Then return to their familiar situation  
8. Having changed.  

Dan writes,

> Realize that it's hardwired into your nervous system, and trust that in a vacuum, raised by wolves, your stories would follow this pattern.   

And if you've read Chekhov, an acclaimed master of the short story, you can see this pattern in action. Sure, the subject matter, situation, premise at hand varies wildly and the packaging is fresh each time, but at the end of the day, Chekhov's stories _feel_ complete and whole. With Salinger, I felt like most stories left me with a sense of incompleteness. Not necessarily because his stories don't necessary follow this pattern. Some do and reek of being excerpts instead of chapters of his characters' lives.

Unsurprisingly, my favorite from his collection was also the most complete- _For Esme with Love and Squalor_. It's a touching story of compassion and it makes you feel that mysterious sense of belonging which can escape everyone. 

But stories like _Pretty Mouth and Green My Eyes_ and _A Perfect Day for Bananafish_ tick the other way, squirreling themselves into your mind for differing reasons. 

It's hard to get a complete sense of Salinger from the lot of these stories, but reading a single one is enough to get a concrete read of who Salinger is and where he comes from. 


### The Left Hand of Darkness   
Author: Ursula K. Le Guin  
Date published: March 1969  
Date read: January 5, 2020  

Book club book. It's of a much different form than one might expect from a science fiction book. It's more alien political and cultural understanding than action. Even though those aspects, which drive most of the plot, do not need to be set in a science fiction world, there are other elements that demand the setting. Which I think separates out this sort of book from other science fiction books. There's just more happening in this one. There's more to discover, to imaginate, to learn about of this world.

I'll pull excerpts out of [this review](https://lithub.com/how-the-left-hand-of-darkness-changed-everything/) that describe it better.

> There were no lasers, no damsels, no chosen ones. There was war, yes, but a real war, a war not for the fate of the galaxy but for hatred and fear (things that rang true while living in America in late 2001). There was science, too, but it wasn't the science of physics or technology. It was the science of culture. The science of bodies. 

> Another duality--and again another, in that this book is both about gender and not about gender at all. 

> Genly knows he needs to unpack his biases. He spends the entire book trying to do just that.

The book is subtle in the way that many science fiction books are not. I do not read subtle items very well which made _The Left Hand of Darkness_ more challenging. 

I think that society has changed since it's original publication, but I do not think that those changes have made the book less relevant--perhaps only more subtle.

