---
layout: default
title:  "2020 Reading List"
date:   2020-01-05

type:   Note
---

I was pretty good about keeping up reading last year. Let's see if we can keep it up this year.

### The Left Hand of Darkness   
Author: Ursula K. Le Guin  
Date published: March 1969  
Date read: January 5th, 2020  

Book club book. It's of a much different form than one might expect from a science fiction book. It's more alien political and cultural understanding than action. Even though those aspects, which drive most of the plot, do not need to be set in a science fiction world, there are other elements that demand the setting. Which I think separates out this sort of book from other science fiction books. There's just more happening in this one. There's more to discover, to imaginate, to learn about of this world.

I'll pull excerpts out of [this review](https://lithub.com/how-the-left-hand-of-darkness-changed-everything/) that describe it better.

> There were no lasers, no damsels, no chosen ones. There was war, yes, but a real war, a war not for the fate of the galaxy but for hatred and fear (things that rang true while living in America in late 2001). There was science, too, but it wasn't the science of physics or technology. It was the science of culture. The science of bodies. 

> Another duality--and again another, in that this book is both about gender and not about gender at all. 

> Genly knows he needs to unpack his biases. He spends the entire book trying to do just that.

The book is subtle in the way that many science fiction books are not. I do not read subtle items very well which made _The Left Hand of Darkness_ more challenging. 

I think that society has changed since it's original publication, but I do not think that those changes have made the book less relevant--perhaps only more subtle.
