---
layout: default
title: "2021 Reading List"
date: 2021-01-21

type: Note
categories: reading list
---

Is this the year we finally finish _Lolita_?

### Interior Chinatown

Author: Charles Yu  
Published: January 28, 2020
Read: February 9, 2021

Interior Chinatown does something I rarely see in Asian American fiction--be blunt. In my experience, it is more common for Asian American fiction to be stories from which the Asian American experience is embedded within, to be extracted in retrospect. Ken Liu’s _The Paper Menagerie_, which has stuck with me for years, is a wonderfully sad story about the magical origami animals a mother makes for her son. _No-No Boy_ by John Okada details the communal ostracism Ichiro faces for refusing the draft after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. _The Third and Final Continent_ by Lahiri is about the events that lead the narrator to fall in love with his wife. It is certainly easy to draw one’s conclusions about particular shared aspects of the Asian American experience from these stories. _The Paper Menagerie_ does capture some aspect of connecting with one’s parents through cultural and language barriers. _The Third and Final Continent_ does reflect something of the nature of arranged marriage. But the works themselves convey these ideas, as one might expect of most fiction, through story. Interior Chinatown takes the leap of actually stating its opinions directly.

> It’s not clear if he can dunk (no one’s ever seen him try) but he can definitely grab the rim and that alone is pretty impressive given that he’s five eleven and three-quarters. Which, for the record, is the perfect height for an Asian dude. Tall enough for women to notice (even in heels! Even White women!), tall enough to not get ignored by the bartender, but not so tall to get called Yao Ming and considered some kind of Mongolian freak.

And the narrator does so frequently.

It makes complete sense for fiction to stay stylistically far away from the directness found in nonfiction writing about race. For one, it can come off as heavy handed and preachy. After all fiction is fiction for a reason. For another, making direct statements about race and racial experiences may not capture the wide diversity of experience, even if it talks about a widely, but not completely, shared experience. Finally, making direct statements about the less than desirable aspects of being Asian American can come off as whiny, especially given the much worse treatment of other minorities in America. So it is not surprising that there is a gulf between Coates’s _Between the World and Me_ and _No-No Boy_.

> Once that gets going, doors start opening until they’re all open, the whole building buzzing until sunrise, as if nothing matters because nothing does matter because the idea was you came here, your parents and their parents and their parents, and you always seem to have just arrived and yet never seem to have actually arrived. You’re here, supposedly, in a new land full of opportunity, but somehow have gotten trapped in a pretend version of the old country.

The brilliant element that allows _Interior Chinatown_ to straddle the two halves of racial commentary and fictional storytelling is Yu’s decision to write the novel as a screenplay about actors. Written as a screenplay, the “you” of the story refers to both the protagonist but also to you, the reader, if you were to play the part of the protagonist. Those sections give you, the reader, the motivation, the background, the character perspective to play the part of the protagonist. So even if you do not believe that Asian Americans are typecast in their roles, you can let this pass as it is the particular motivation behind the protagonist’s actions. But Yu manages to take this conceit further still. By making the characters in the screenplay also actors in the story itself, Yu manages to make every single faceted character multidimensional in one fell swoop through this meta-structure. Effectively, thanks to this story within a story structure, all of the characters in the story take on many roles, both literary and literally.

> Everyone admired his level of comfort, moving in and out of language and subculture, from backroom poker game to dudes on the corner looking for trouble to the octogenarians playing Go or mahjong at the Benevolent Family Association. Older Brother’s reach and influence was not limited to the Middle Kingdom and its ethnic diaspora, but extended into other neighboring domains: he sing karaoke with the Japanese salarymen, could polish two plates of ddukbokki slathered in a tangy, blood-red gochujang, wash it down with a bottle of milky soju, all while beating the pants odd the K-town regulars at their own drinking games, dropping some of his passable Korean (mostly curse words) in the process.

With such explicit signposting of roles and discussion of race, giving every character multiple parts that clash and meld allows the novel to feel fresh and interesting without feeling as though one is on the receiving end of a lecture (although the book does devolve into one at the end).

While the story itself is, well, generic, the writing, in addition to the unique structure and conceit, certainly buoys the experience. It’s full of honesty and authenticity. With brief windows into three generations of Asian Americans, I can say for certain that I recognized my story within those lines. Especially ones like,

> The great shame of your life that you can’t speak his language, not really, not fluently.

There’s heart in this story,

> because by the time he gets to “West Virginia, mountain mama,” you’re going to be singing along, and by the time he’s done, you might understand why a seventy-sever-year-old guy from a tiny island in the Taiwan Strait who’s been in a foreign country for two-thirds of his life can nail a song, note perfect, about wanting to go home.

And there’s meta-commentary,

> But at the same, I’m guilty, too. Guilty of playing this role. Letting it define me. Internalizing the role so completely that I’ve lost track of where reality starts and the performance begins. And letting that define how I see other people.

And there’s just the right mix of everything to make this short book excellent.
