---
layout: default
title: "2021 Reading List"
date: 2021-07-19

type: Note
categories: reading list
---

Is this the year we finally finish _Lolita_?

### Is This Anything?

Author: Jerry Seinfield  
Published: October 6, 2020  
Listened: July 19, 2021

I thought that this would be a perfect audiobook. A book of immaculately polished jokes read by the legendary Seinfield himself. It would be a private show, just for me. But with each of the subtitles narrated by a different, monotonic voice interrupting Seinfeld’s routine and Seinfeld himself without his audience-powered, charismatic delivery, I found myself thinking that these jokes were unfunny, even mistakenly believing that these jokes were the rejected table scraps of his efforts and not, as I later found out, the carefully curated selection from his actual routines and works. But, wanting to learn something and thinking that the jokes in the latter part of the book were funnier than the former, I went back to the text version, trying to see whether there was a change in the craftsmanship of the jokes over the years. To my surprise, I found the jokes hilarious. Even the jokes from the 70s, even though I had just heard all of them, even though I had previously thought them unfunny.

Perhaps it is because I had to focus on the reading bit - translating those ink splatterings into thoughts - that I didn’t see the punchline coming, even though it is right there on the page. The words don’t move, I don’t move, yet they still surprise me. It’s like seeing a spider while taking a shower. I’m too busy lathering up, singing along with my Disney shower playlist. I’m not moving; it’s not moving; but still scares me nonetheless. I’m not even annoyed by the parenthesized stage cues written down. Having the text in front of you also makes it much easier to think about what is going on in a joke. I still can’t tell what makes a joke good. In fact, this exercise of listening to, and then reading the same joke has really proven that I cannot tell what makes a joke good. But nonetheless, take the following bit, which I love

> To me, the ultimate would be to live the Parakeet Lifestyle
> It’s the most efficient apartment possible.
> A well-ventilated room overlooking the paper.
> Don’t even have to walk to the bathroom.
> Toilet and newspaper are already combined.
> Food and water mounted on the wall.
> You want to go to sleep,
> turn your head around, put it in your back.
> Morning you don’t even have to get up,
> you’re already standing.
> Double-check the cage door lock.
> See what the cat’s up to.
> Take the rest of the day off.

I love this joke, the punchline, and especially the bit about the cat. But having the text in front of me gives me time to think about the construction of the joke. Would it make it funnier to flip the third to last and second to last lines? Is it funnier that the Parakeet first checks the lock and then checks on the cat? Or is it potentially funnier that the Parakeet first checks on the cat and then the lock, as if I, the Parakeet, would make a silly mistake and be reminded to double check?

### Bad Blood: Secrets and Lies in a Silicon Valley Startup

Author: John Carreyrou  
Published: May 21, 2018  
Listened: June 11, 2021

_Bad Blood_ features a cast of outliers. Elizabeth Holmes and Sunny Balwani, lost in lust for riches, sacrifice the well being and health of their patients. David Boies, willing to ignore truth for wealth, leverages bureaucracy and power to silence and intimidate plaintiffs. Richard Fuisz, ever the opportunist, abuses a broken patent system to funnel yet more money into his pocket. And it is reflexive, to look at this list of characters and their stories, and think that I would not have done the things they did. Of course not, these characters are outliers, and it is more than likely that I am not such an outlier. Similarly, I would likely not be an Erika Cheung or a Tyler Shultz or John Carreyrou, as much as I wish I would be. They, too, are outliers.

Instead, it is more likely that I would be a Ana Arriola, the designer who quits, or a Michael Brille, the lawyer who seeks Tyler to sign a nondisclosure. People who, by chance, are connected to these outliers and whose actions are informed by them. It is not an unlikely position. I often see people, commenting under another article about the negative ramifications that X company has on the world, saying that its employees should quit. And I have known some people, who I respect, quit for the very reason that they cannot work at their company and support the work their company does. So this line of thinking brings to mind a certain scale of values (money and convenience vs other values) where everything has a price. And I think it is interesting to think about what my own price is.

### A Thousand Years of Good Prayers

Author: Yiyun Li  
Date published: September 20, 2005  
Date read: May 22, 2021

> Be pitiful, for every man is fighting a hard battle.
>
> Ian Maclaren (1897)

We were assigned the title story amongst the readings in my Asian American literature course and while I vaguely recognized the introduction in my rereading, I had forgotten the many key details that make the story. It may have been difficult for me to appreciate the craft that went into the piece because the various pieces of the story felt like they could only be placed in that formation. The irony of something difficult being done well not appearing very difficult. However, this time around, _A Thousand Years_ was nestled with Li’s other works, which shared enough similarities to emphasize the pieces of the puzzle.

The common tension of these stories revolve around the backstories of the characters and how knowledge of those backstories change the way we, the readers, as well as other characters feel about the characters in question. In _Love in the Marketplace_, Sansan has a secret arrangement with her childhood romance, Tu. The resulting fallout from his betrayal is hidden from her community and family. The resulting ignorance causes extreme turmoil for the entire family. Everyone from her mother to her students treat her as a heartbroken, doleful girl. But as the reader, knowing the true backstory, Sansan is a more complicated figure. Her actions _are_ those of a hurt soul, but her actions are better understood as a person deeply invested in integrity. Even though this is not a significant change of perspective, the difference is enough to help begin to understand Sansan’s actions.

Somewhat similarly, in _A Thousand Years_, knowing Mr. Shi’s true work history gives a different perspective about all the behaviors that transpired prior to the reveal. It changes the way we think about his relationship with Madam or his relationship with his daughter. His backstory changes him from the bumbling, out of touch, culturally foreign, overprotective parent to an embarrassed yet prideful flawed individual. It also matters that despite his best effort in hiding his past, his daughter is well aware of the truth.

These twists feel like the plot twists at the end of detective novels or thrillers. The sudden realization that we have been misled, maliciously or otherwise, can be jarring and exciting. Fiction presents a wonderful, harmless place, to have our assumptions challenged. I only recently, and far too late, learned the backstory of someone close to me. Doing so changed the fundamental way I understood their actions and life - my previous assumptions about them being shattered. I feel the way that I feel about the other people in Sansan’s life - oblivious, unaware, incognizant. I had not even considered a different perspective. I think it is good for me to realize that despite this realization, the words of Maclaren are still hard to practice.

### Interior Chinatown

Author: Charles Yu  
Published: January 28, 2020  
Read: February 9, 2021

Interior Chinatown does something I rarely see in Asian American fiction--be blunt. In my experience, it is more common for Asian American fiction to be stories in which the Asian American experience is embedded within, to be extracted in retrospect. Ken Liu’s _The Paper Menagerie_, which has stuck with me for years, is a wonderfully sad story about the magical origami animals a mother makes for her son. _No-No Boy_ by John Okada details the communal ostracism Ichiro faces for refusing the draft after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. _The Third and Final Continent_ by Lahiri is about the events that lead the narrator to fall in love with his wife. It is certainly easy to draw one’s conclusions about particular shared aspects of the Asian American experience from these stories. _The Paper Menagerie_ does capture some aspect of connecting with one’s parents through cultural and language barriers. _The Third and Final Continent_ does reflect something of the nature of arranged marriage. But the works themselves convey these ideas, as one might expect of most fiction, through story. Interior Chinatown takes the leap of actually stating its opinions directly.

> It’s not clear if he can dunk (no one’s ever seen him try) but he can definitely grab the rim and that alone is pretty impressive given that he’s five eleven and three-quarters. Which, for the record, is the perfect height for an Asian dude. Tall enough for women to notice (even in heels! Even White women!), tall enough to not get ignored by the bartender, but not so tall to get called Yao Ming and considered some kind of Mongolian freak.

And the narrator does so frequently.

It makes complete sense for fiction to stay stylistically far away from the directness found in nonfiction writing about race. For one, it can come off as heavy handed and preachy. After all fiction is fiction for a reason. For another, making direct statements about race and racial experiences may not capture the wide diversity of experience, even if it talks about a widely, but not completely, shared experience. Finally, making direct statements about the less than desirable aspects of being Asian American can come off as whiny, especially given the much worse treatment of other minorities in America. So it is not surprising that there is a gulf between Coates’s _Between the World and Me_ and _No-No Boy_.

> Once that gets going, doors start opening until they’re all open, the whole building buzzing until sunrise, as if nothing matters because nothing does matter because the idea was you came here, your parents and their parents and their parents, and you always seem to have just arrived and yet never seem to have actually arrived. You’re here, supposedly, in a new land full of opportunity, but somehow have gotten trapped in a pretend version of the old country.

The brilliant element that allows _Interior Chinatown_ to straddle the two halves of racial commentary and fictional storytelling is Yu’s decision to write the novel as a screenplay about actors. Written as a screenplay, the “you” of the story refers to both the protagonist but also to you, the reader, if you were to play the part of the protagonist. Those sections give you, the reader, the motivation, the background, the character perspective to play the part of the protagonist. So even if you do not believe that Asian Americans are typecast in their roles, you can let this pass as it is the particular motivation behind the protagonist’s actions. But Yu manages to take this conceit further still. By making the characters in the screenplay also actors in the story itself, Yu manages to make every single faceted character multidimensional in one fell swoop through this meta-structure. Effectively, thanks to this story within a story structure, all of the characters in the story take on many roles, both literary and literally.

> Everyone admired his level of comfort, moving in and out of language and subculture, from backroom poker game to dudes on the corner looking for trouble to the octogenarians playing Go or mahjong at the Benevolent Family Association. Older Brother’s reach and influence was not limited to the Middle Kingdom and its ethnic diaspora, but extended into other neighboring domains: he sing karaoke with the Japanese salarymen, could polish two plates of ddukbokki slathered in a tangy, blood-red gochujang, wash it down with a bottle of milky soju, all while beating the pants odd the K-town regulars at their own drinking games, dropping some of his passable Korean (mostly curse words) in the process.

With such explicit signposting of roles and discussion of race, giving every character multiple parts that clash and meld allows the novel to feel fresh and interesting without feeling as though one is on the receiving end of a lecture (although the book does devolve into one at the end).

While the story itself is, well, generic, the writing, in addition to the unique structure and conceit, certainly buoys the experience. It’s full of honesty and authenticity. With brief windows into three generations of Asian Americans, I can say for certain that I recognized my story within those lines. Especially ones like,

> The great shame of your life that you can’t speak his language, not really, not fluently.

There’s heart in this story,

> because by the time he gets to “West Virginia, mountain mama,” you’re going to be singing along, and by the time he’s done, you might understand why a seventy-sever-year-old guy from a tiny island in the Taiwan Strait who’s been in a foreign country for two-thirds of his life can nail a song, note perfect, about wanting to go home.

And there’s meta-commentary,

> But at the same, I’m guilty, too. Guilty of playing this role. Letting it define me. Internalizing the role so completely that I’ve lost track of where reality starts and the performance begins. And letting that define how I see other people.

And there’s just the right mix of everything to make this short book excellent.

### Invitation to a Beheading

Author: Vladimir Nabokov  
Published: 1935-1936  
Date read: January 24, 2021

I often, in moments of contemplative self-reflection, find myself to be lacking empathy. It is hard for me to understand, to feel, viscerally, a circumstance I have not experienced myself. But I found Nabokov’s _Invitation to a Beheading_ at the time in my life when I did not need it to tell me what it is to experience someone waiting for their imminent death. It’s the exact wrong amount of time--too short and fraught with troubles to not consider and too far away to do anything but to boil in anxiety. The experience is brutal, full of regrets, and mood swings. I did not need Nabokov to tell me. Instead, what I found in Nabokov was simply a far too poetic, elocutionary retelling of the circumstance.

> “It is not out of curiosity that I ask,” said Cincinnatus. “It is true that cowards are always inquisitive. But I assure you … Even if I can’t control my chills and so forth--that does not mean anything. A rider is not responsible for the shivering of his horse. I want to know why for this reason: The compensation for a death sentence is knowledge of the exact hour when one is to die. A great luxury, but one that is well earned. However, I am being left in that ignorance which is tolerable only to those living at liberty. And furthermore, I have in my head many projects that were begun and interrupted at various times … I simply shall not pursue them if the time remaining before my execution is not sufficient for their orderly conclusion. This is why …”

> But how can I begin writing when I do not know whether I shall have time enough, and the tortue comes when you say to yourself, ‘Yesterday there would have been enough time’--and again you think, ‘If only I had begun yesterday …’

In such circumstances, the only thing keeping you going is hope. Hope is a different beast. Hope is the capricious beast of last resort. It may lumber and carry you along, but it may also rebel and destroy you in a turn. I would not choose hope, but sometimes you are given no choices. Hope is sauerkraut probiotics, hope is salt crystal detoxes, hope is dog deworming medicine. And when hope chooses to, it can be crushing.

> Cincinnatus did not ask him anything, but when Rodion had left, and time dragged on at its customary trot, he realized that once again he had been duped, that he had streamlined his soul to no purpose, and that everything had remained just as uncertain, viscous and senseless as before.

When waiting, time crushes in different ways. One of time’s weapons is its relentless, unstoppable flow. There is a moment, from which point on, others continue to be pushed forward by time without you. Knowing this means thinking about this face. Thinking about the various potential lives that will be lived without you. Fuzzy, faint, uncertain, and most of all, painful.

> Another vestige of the previous day was the alligator album with its massive dark silver monogram that he had taken along in a fit of meek abstraction: the singular photohoroscope put together by the resourceful M’sieur Pierre, that is, a series of photographs depicting the natural progression of a given person’s entire life. How was this done? Thus: extensively retouched snapshots of Emmie’s present face were supplemented by shots of other people--for the sake of costume, furniture and surroundings--so as to create the entire decor and stage properties of her future life.

Nabokov is thorough and extensive and captures the whole spectrum of situational emotions and there is much more to say about his work, but I do not have the energy to bear doing so. Thankfully, Nabokov speaks for himself.

> “What will you say to me? In spite of everything I loved you, and will go on loving you--on my knees, with my shoulders drawn back, showing my heels to the headsman and streaming my goose neck--even then. And afterwards--perhaps most of all afterwards--I shall love you, and one day we shall have a real, all-embracing explanation, and then perhaps we shall somehow fit together, you and I, and turn ourselves in such a way that we form one pattern, and solve the puzzle: draw a line from point A to point B … without looking, or, without lifting the pencil … or in some other way … we shall connect the points, draw the line, and you and I shall form that unique design for which I yearn. If they do this kind of thing to me every morning, they will get me trained and I shall become quite wooden.”

> “When you go out,” said Cincinnatus, “note the clock in the corridor. The dial is blank; however, every hour the watchman washes off the old hand and daubs on a new one--and that’s how we live, by tarbrush time, and the ringing is the work of the watchman, which is why he is called a ‘watch’ man.”

> Involuntarily yielding to the temptation of logical development, involuntarily (be careful, Cincinnatus!) forging into a chain all the things that were quite harmless as long as they remained unlinked, he inspired the meaningless with meaning, and the lifeless with life.

> The thought, when written down, becomes less oppressive, but some thoughts are like a cancerous tumor: you express it, you excise it, and it grows back worse than before. It is hard to imagine that this very morning, in an hour or two…

> “Measure me while I live--after it will be too late.”
