---
layout: default
title: "2022 Reading List"
date: 2022-03-08

type: Note
categories: reading list
---

Trying to keep this up.

### The Idiot

Author: Elif Batuman  
Date read: March 8 2022  
Date published: March 2017

### The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine

Author: Michael Lewis  
Date read: February 12 2022  
Date published: March 15 2010

There is something deeply attractive about the irreverent truth teller - especially when they are shedding light on a, at least from their telling, deeply corrupt, deceitful subject.

> Bond market terminology was designed less to convey meaning than to bewilder outsiders. Overpriced bonds were not “Expensive” overpriced bonds were “rich,” which almost made them sound like something you should buy. The floors of subprime mortgage bonds were not called floors–or anything else that might lead the bond buyer to form any sort of concrete image in his mind–but tranches. The bottom tranche–the risky ground floor–was not called the ground floor but the mezzanine, or the mezz, which made it sound less like a dangerous investment and more like a highly prized seat in a domed stadium.

It is this direct, unapologetic commentary, in combination with the decision to frame the subject as a story about people and characters instead of directly about a complicated bond market that makes this story so readable. It is not hard to imagine a book, written by some professor emeritus with one or four awards for achievement in economics, that is so dense that it wouldn’t understand this quip about it. Instead of a long dissertation on synthetic CDOs, instead, there is a short explanation with more intense focus on the people

> Eisman had a curious way of listening; he didn’t so much listen to what you were saying as subcontract to some remote region of his brain the task of deciding whether whatever you were saying was worth listening to, while his mind went off to play on its own. As a result, he never actually heard what you said to him the first time you said it. If his mental subcontractor detected a level of interest in what you had just said, it radioed a signal to the mother ship, which then wheeled around with the most intense focus. “Say that again,” he’d say. And you would! Because now Eisman was so obviously listening to you, and, as he listened so selectively, you felt flattered.

And it certainly helps that the quotes that he got are incredible.

> “Senior management’s job is to pay people,” he’d say. “If they fuck a hundred guys out of a hundred grand each, that’s ten million more for them. They have four categories: happy, satisfied, dissatisfied, disgusted. If they hit happy, they’ve screwed up: They never want you happy. On the other hand, they don’t want you so disgusted you quit. The sweet spot is somewhere between dissatisfied and disgusted.”

> “There were more morons than crooks, but the crooks were higher up.”

> “Because his memory is so selective, he has no scars from prior experience,” said Vinny.
