---
layout: default
title: "2022 Reading List"
date: 2022-03-16

type: Note
categories: reading list
---

Trying to keep this up.

### One More Thing: Stories and Other Stories

Author: B.J. Novak  
Date read: March 16 2022  
Date published: February 4 2014

From the very first story, _The Rematch_, the genesis of each story is plain. What if the tortoise and the hare from _The Tortoise and the Hare_ had a rematch. What if Nelson Mandela had a roast on Comedy Central. What if the stock market were the narrator. What if Chris Hansen went to a Justin Beiber concert. What if Encyclopedia Brown were actually Wikipedia Brown.

Given the variety of these ideas, not all generate the same volume of material. So rather than drop an idea or prolong its length, the result is sometimes stories like:

> If you love something, let it go.  
> If you don’t love something, definitely let it go.  
> Basically, just drop everything, who cares.

Which can be less stories and more little jokes. More than any other short stories collection so far, these stories rely more on the constant stream of fresh ideas and different circumstances than the particular prose that they are conveyed. That is not to say that the writing itself is subpar. But unlike a story from Ted Chiang, where its intricate structure and arrangement is half of the effect, or a story from Salinger, where the language is rewarding, the stories in One More Thing feel the most approachable.

Novak does not shy away from _short_ ideas, nor does he shy away from crass language, nor unconventional vestiges. At the end of one story, he includes

> Discussion question:  
> Do you think Julie should fuck the warlord? Why or why not?

Saying that Novak is not aiming to write high literature does not seem offensive in part because it would seem almost offensive to Novak to suggest that was his intention. Part of me thinks that explicitly ruling out that goal lends one a sense of freedom in their work. One can include references to their own work in other media without making a decision to determine whether this is actually the _right_ literary decision.

> Niagara Falls was a disaster. My eight-year-old daughter was the one who had begged to see it because a couple from a television show she watched got married there.

And not focusing on being high art may be best overall. After all, isn’t high art inherently classist and unwelcoming?

> The new translation of _Don Quixote_ wasn’t read by readers, but by everyone. For the first time since Spain at the turn of the seventeenth century, it became not-strange for a friend or a neighbor to snort out loud with an involuntary laugh over an image from _Don Quixote_ or for someone to say on a second date, “You know how in _Don Quixote_ when …?” out of an attempt to connect, not an attempt to impress.

Every idea, no matter how small or how simple, is worth exploring. Which I think is deeply motivating and freeing.

### The Idiot

Author: Elif Batuman  
Date read: March 8 2022  
Date published: March 2017

Could be summarized as–nothing really happens even though it feels frantic at times. Which may be a frustrating experience. There’s a motto the company uses that goes along the lines of, “don’t mistake motion for progress” which is often posted superimposed over a picture of a rocking horse. But there is a reason rocking horses, roller coasters, and racetracks exist, despite all ending up in the same position they started. That feeling of frenzy and motion can be thrilling. It also almost perfectly captures a feeling of being a college freshman - the conceit of _The Idiot_.

And neither the structure nor the plot really sets up the novel for success. It does not seem easy to craft an engaging story when the slow moving action is conveyed through a college freshman’s observations of events, often unrelated, and ideas, often random. After all, while I spend a lot of time in my head with my own thoughts and while I think my internal skull sessions are captivating, I can safely assert that people would not be interested in actually reading a continuous stream of it. (Follow me on Twitter @internalskullsessions). But Selin managed to keep me engaged by being a combination: self-aware, witty, clever, novel, uncertain, judgmental, and honest while also discussing subjects that I want to have an interest in. She jumps breathlessly from Anna Karenina and literature

> The professor often talked about the inadequacy of published translations, reading us passages from novels in French and Russian, to show how bad the translations were. I didn’t understand anything he said in French or Russian, so I preferred the translations.

to emacs and the mechanical turk to self narrative and self evaluation

> It was a mystery to me how Svetlana generated so many opinions. Any piece of information seemed to produce an opinion on contact. Meanwhile, I went from class to class, read hundreds, thousands of pages of the distilled ideas of the great thinkers of human history, and nothing happened.

to unanswerable questions about life

> Was that narrative economy, or was it a statement about the way of the world–about how the jilted had to suffice for one another?

And most of that was fun to listen in on. It works in part because those seemingly spontaneous thoughts are carefully composed and edited into seemingly spontaneous thoughts. This metaknowledge makes reading and interpreting and analyzing and hypothesizing about language’s meaning engaging. And _The Idiot_ does a good job of reminding me that I hold a special part of my romantic heart for letters and emails for that very reason. The emails that Selin and Ivan write to each other are, at times, cryptic, avoidant, and reserved. They are also creative and engaging.

Most in person conversations allow each side a moderate amount of time to say a moderate amount of stuff. Exceeding either seems to give the conversation an odd quality about it. Conversation over text messaging gives people more time to say a little less. But letters – letters almost have an opposite effect. They almost require an extensive amount of time to craft. To write and edit. And re-edit. Which gives the recipient cause to interpret and reinterpret. Hidden somewhere in there is meaning, or so it may seem. Which can be frustrating.

Perhaps the central meaning in this entire novel is about that search for meaning in text. Quite alot points to that.

> Everything the professors said seemed to be somehow beside the point. You wanted to know why Anna had to die, and instead they told you that nineteenth-century Russian landowners felt conflicted about whether they were really a part of Europe. The implication was that it was somehow naive to want to talk about anything interesting, or to think that you would ever know anything important.
>
> I wasn’t interested in society, or ancient people’s money troubles. I wanted to know what books really meant. That was how my mother and I had always talked about literature. “I need you to read this, too,” she would say, handing me a _New Yorker_ story in which an unhappily married man had to get a rabies shot, “so you can tell me what it really means.” She believed, and I did, too, that every story had a central meaning. You could get that meaning, or you could miss it completely.

But maybe I have missed the point completely.

### The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine

Author: Michael Lewis  
Date read: February 12 2022  
Date published: March 15 2010

There is something deeply attractive about the irreverent truth teller - especially when they are shedding light on a, at least from their telling, deeply corrupt, deceitful subject.

> Bond market terminology was designed less to convey meaning than to bewilder outsiders. Overpriced bonds were not “Expensive” overpriced bonds were “rich,” which almost made them sound like something you should buy. The floors of subprime mortgage bonds were not called floors–or anything else that might lead the bond buyer to form any sort of concrete image in his mind–but tranches. The bottom tranche–the risky ground floor–was not called the ground floor but the mezzanine, or the mezz, which made it sound less like a dangerous investment and more like a highly prized seat in a domed stadium.

It is this direct, unapologetic commentary, in combination with the decision to frame the subject as a story about people and characters instead of directly about a complicated bond market that makes this story so readable. It is not hard to imagine a book, written by some professor emeritus with one or four awards for achievement in economics, that is so dense that it wouldn’t understand this quip about it. Instead of a long dissertation on synthetic CDOs, instead, there is a short explanation with more intense focus on the people

> Eisman had a curious way of listening; he didn’t so much listen to what you were saying as subcontract to some remote region of his brain the task of deciding whether whatever you were saying was worth listening to, while his mind went off to play on its own. As a result, he never actually heard what you said to him the first time you said it. If his mental subcontractor detected a level of interest in what you had just said, it radioed a signal to the mother ship, which then wheeled around with the most intense focus. “Say that again,” he’d say. And you would! Because now Eisman was so obviously listening to you, and, as he listened so selectively, you felt flattered.

And it certainly helps that the quotes that he got are incredible.

> “Senior management’s job is to pay people,” he’d say. “If they fuck a hundred guys out of a hundred grand each, that’s ten million more for them. They have four categories: happy, satisfied, dissatisfied, disgusted. If they hit happy, they’ve screwed up: They never want you happy. On the other hand, they don’t want you so disgusted you quit. The sweet spot is somewhere between dissatisfied and disgusted.”

> “There were more morons than crooks, but the crooks were higher up.”

> “Because his memory is so selective, he has no scars from prior experience,” said Vinny.
