---
layout: default
title: "2023 Reading List"
date: 2023-02-18

type: Note
categories: reading list
---

Trying to be better than last year.

### The Island of Doctor Moreau

Author: H. G. Wells  
Date read: January 29, 2023  
Date published: 1896

For a short period of time in high school. My debate partner had worked to convince a mutual to read this book. Having finally read it, I am still not sure I see why. Of the various themes that the book touches upon, perhaps the one that may have most closely resonated with them is Wells’ treatment of religion. At that time, their views of religion perhaps were less favorable and may have respected Well’s portrayal of religion on the island.

> Now they stumbled in the shackles of humanity, lived in a fear that never died, fretted by a law they could not understand; their mock-human existence, begun in an agony, was one long internal struggle, one long dread of Moreau–and for what? It was the wantonness of it that stirred me.

At one point, I might have regarded religion in the same manner. I might have thought that Well’s was being sarcastic when he writes

> I feel as though the animal was surging up through them; that presently the degradation of the Islanders will be played over again on a larger scale. I know this is an illusion; that these seeming men and women about me are indeed men and women,--men and women for ever, perfectly reasonable creatures, full of human desires and tender solicitude, emancipated from instinct and the slaves of no fantastic Law,--being altogether different from the Beast Folk.

After all, I might have thought, religion for humans and the Law for the Beast Folk could scarcely be different. But it is hard to pinpoint Wells’ opinion here. While there’s ample evidence to suggest that the Beast Folk have very human behaviors or at least humans have very Beast Folk behaviors),

> But whether he treated it well or ill, it loved nothing so much as to be near him.

there are lines such as these

> This is a mood, however, that comes to me now, I thank God, more rarely. I have withdrawn myself from the confusion of cities and multitudes, and spend my days surrounded by wise books,--bright windows in this life of ours, lit by the shining souls of men. I see few strangers, and have but a small household.

which suggest that there is _something_, _something_ which separates human from beast.

Ultimately, Wells raises, but does not answer for me, uncomfortable, but practical ethical questions about human and animal rights, pain and suffering, egocentrism and nihilism. And if nothing else, it blesses us with a new Shakespearean line about futility.

> What’s it all for, Prendick? Are we bubbles blown by a baby?

### Dear Committee Members: A Novel

Author: Julie Schumacher  
Date read: January 27, 2023  
Date published: August 19, 2014

> I didn’t appreciate him returning the car with the gas tank empty.

To my ear, this sentence sounds like it flows.

> I didn’t appreciate his returning the car with the gas tank empty.

But this sounds formal and correct.

This example was taken from a [small note](https://brians.wsu.edu/2016/05/19/gerunds-pronouns/) shared by my friend and there was a lively repartee about the sound of it all with people discussing quadruple successive gerunds and the like. Certainly, the raw semantic meaning conveyed by both are identical, but as readers and listeners we take away different impressions. That formality, the choice of expression, all of that breathes life into the main character of _Dear Committee Members_. The work comprises solely of letters written by a small university English professor, whose personality of being an oversharer, old fashioned, and forthright mixed with the sharp tongued, erudite, pen wielding skills of a novelist produce such letters as

> Ms. Vanessa Cuddigan has asked me to submit a letter of reference to your poorly spelled organization [Kompu-Metricka, Inc.] on her behalf. While I have only praise for Ms. Cuddigan, who graduated two years ago with a major in English, I had expected her to ask that I recommend her for graduate school. Instead, having completed a stint with Teach for America, she is now apparently desirous of some sort of data-entry position with your firm–clearly a soul-squelching enterprise. I have asked her to explain herself but she is evasive, leading me to wonder if something unfortunate happened during the past two years to destroy her ambition.

It is the little things. The use of the words “desirous”, “soul-squelching”. The somewhat circuitous phrasing of “leading me to wonder if something unfortunate happened during the past two years to destroy her ambition”. They give our main character a certain English professorial je ne sais quoi. And while our main character is not particularly likable, although he does display some redeeming qualities, one can certainly imagine such a character without the author needing to include a description about him because the language that is used draws from our assumptions and prejudices about language and class and behavior to produce an amalgam of stereotypes that is our main character.

There is a small, but meaningful amount of plot that happens in the work, but the purpose of the plot is not to be the point of intrigue. Instead, the plot is used as the starch in this letter of recommendation based paper mache where the real entertainment is the language. Formal and biting, correct and unabashed. Even if I, myself, would say “him returning”, there is still something to appreciate about “his returning”.

### Lesser Known Monsters of the 21st Century

Author: Kim Fu  
Date read: January 19, 2023  
Date published: February 1, 2022

In any short story collection, there’s inevitably one that sticks. It was the sheer cruelty of _400 Pound CEO_ from _CivilWarLand in Bad Decline_, the clever design of _The Merchant and the Alchemist's Gate_ from _Exhalation_, the elegant construction of _Pretty Mouth and Green My Eyes_ from _Nine Stories_. It will be the familiarity of the stories in _Lesser Known Monsters_.

After reading several of the stories, but in particular the first, _Pre-Simulation Consultation XF007867_, I felt the urge to tell everyone I knew. But though I think anyone can appreciate the story, I think my fondness of it stems from a particular sensation of identification. While I hold all of the previous short stories in high regard, and would effuse endless streams of praise for them, I think that might stem from a quasi intellectually detached frame of mind. I love the stories in _Lesser Known Monsters_ because they feel like someone better than I took my thoughts and gave them the legs necessary to reach others.

From “Time Cubes”

> Alive’s Depressive Specialist said they were living in a paradise, and Alive had to agree, in the sense that the recent past was worse, the future would almost certainly be worse, and the present was worse for most other people, living elsewhere.

> “Depressives are selfish,” her Specialist had said. “You’re selfish, and then you berate yourself for being selfish, which is just another way of focusing your attention on yourself.” Said in the same gentle, infuriatingly patient voice in which she said everything.

From “Twenty Hours”

> Our once-reasonable anxieties grown distorted, outsized, habitual. There will never be enough money to make us feel safe.

And the stand out story, _Pre-Simulation Consultation XF007867_

> – What else is important?
>
> – We’re walking through the gardens together. She’s holding my arm. She’s telling me plant facts, boring ones, like “Did you know bamboo can grow a full inch in just an hour?” And she’s gossiping about relatives I don’t remember, and kids I went to elementary school with. “Little Rusell is a newscaster now! Aunt Sandy is pregnant!” That sort of thing. And I’m just listening. I say things like, “That’s interesting,” and “Russell did love to hear himself talk.” I’m not getting snide or impatient, or looking at my phone, or thinking about work, or picking a fight.

> – Enjoy your unicorn.
>
> – I will.

Perhaps others feel as seen as I do. Or, perhaps, it’ll help others see.
