---
layout: default
title: "2024 Reading List"
date: 2024-01-15

type: Note
categories: reading list
---

Not looking good this year and it's only January.

### Sum: Forty Tales from the Afterlives

Author: David Eagleman  
Date published: February 10, 2009  
Date read: January 15th, 2024

I recently learned how to make Shakshuka. Under the careful guidance of a watchful hand (as no responsible governing body would let me within a [boat length](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_unusual_units_of_measurement#Boat_length) of an active stovezone, I discovered that it is composed of surprisingly few ingredients that work very well together.

It starts with a compelling premise. Doesn’t really matter if the premise begins to crumble under the weight of a full inspection because that’s really just the base. Then fill it with little eggs of ideas. I have for a long time wondered whether life was merely a dream - that I was a coma patient imagining a life that didn’t match reality - a vivid Descartes brain in a vat scenario.

> Something dawned on you when you heard the children’s song: _Merrily, merrily, merrily, merrily, life is but a dream_. You began to suspect that you were, perhaps, a butterfly dreaming it was a human, or, worse yet, a brain in a jar experiencing sights and sounds and smells and tastes–all of them buy dreamstuff. And so you waited for death in order to find out whether you were strapped with spotted wings or surrounded by a glass jar.

Or

> As you wait in line and strike up a conversation with the woman behind you, you discover that the afterlife was long ago given over to committees.

And finally, a meaningful, specific, story takeaway that turns those ideas into something individual, something human, something personal.

> And thus your punishment is cleverly and automatically regulated in the afterlife: the more you fall short of your potential, the more of these annoying selves you are forced to deal with.

Sprinkle in some nice phrasing and language and it becomes something people can obsess about.
