---
layout: default
title:  "The Dark Knight as Epic"
date:   2014-12-17

type:   Writing
categories: dark-knight epic
---
Excerpt

## Defining Epic For English 111: A Long Winded Plea for The Dark Knight

At a glance, <span data-balloon="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epic_poetry">epic</span> is a relatively narrow category of works. Historically, epic refers to poetry that details the heroics of a famous character and contains a number of distinguishing elements such as the <span data-balloon="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epic_catalogue">epic catalogue</span> and the invocation to a muse. Indeed, definitions of this sort appear to have been formed by reviewing works such as the Iliad and the Aeneid, extracting the like components from the works, and using those similar features as the definition of epic. But as <span data-balloon="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Terms/epic.html">some have noted</span>, using these forms of definitions has resulted in a variety of interesting results. One such result of using these forms of definitions is that many works that lack these elements may feel as if they belong to the epic genre. Certainly, gut reactions are mutually incompatible with definitions, but that certainly has not stopped the enormous amount of dialogue over including works such as Moby Dick or Ramayana into the epic genre. Another related result is the dearth of modern epics. Not only does the epic tradition appear to decline after the seventeenth century, but there are few contemporary epics that are indisputably an epic under the stringent definitions. These issues, being too large to appropriately resolve or even impossible to resolve, are the background that English 111: Epic: From Homer to Star Wars is set against. A class that traces the epic genre from the oldest surviving works in the Iliad to modern works in Middlemarch and Star Wars, English 111 looks hopefully into epic’s future. Interestingly, what might English 111 say about the definition of epic, even if that definition is restricted to just the scope of English 111? And most importantly, is there any room in English 111 for The Dark Knight?

English 111 provides an interesting environment in which to introduce The Dark Knight. The class curriculum contains six works that are presented as belonging to the epic tradition: The Iliad, The Odyssey, The Aeneid, Paradise Lost, Middlemarch, and Star Wars (later renamed to Star Wars IV: A New Hope). However, despite asserting that these six works belong in the epic genre, English 111 does not present a definition or list of criteria a work needs to meet in order for a work to be considered epic. Certainly, the class does introduce concepts addressed by other definitions, but not in terms of a definition. Thus, in order to properly advocate for The Dark Knight’s inclusion into the curriculum based off the scope of the class, either the epic definition used by the class should be uncovered or an epic definition that agrees with the class should be used. From there, it will be possible to judge the merits of including The Dark Knight. 

### Shortcomings of the Classic Definition of Epic

Up to this point, it has been assumed that a strict application of the conventionally held definitions of epic is incongruous to the course. However, it is worth the time to examine why such definitions are inharmonious with the course’s assertion that these 6 works are epic. Perhaps from this examination, it is possible to gather some insight into the definition the class uses. Middlemarch and Star Wars are the direct challenges the class offers against the classic definition—neither work is poetry! Middlemarch doesn’t sing the heroic actions of grand heroes, feature divine intervention, or narrate extended battle scenes. Star Wars lacks an invocation to a muse, fails to state a theme, and is more humorous than its epic predecessors. But rather than attempt to resolve the conflict between these works and the epic definition through a series of epic logical leaps and rationalizations, it is possible to acknowledge the possible failure of “classic” epic definition to have the foresight to incorporate these works. Because English 111 operates on a distinct, unstated definition of epic, there exists the opportunity to propose a new, more appropriate definition in the scope of the class. 

### Redefining Epic for English 111

Before redefining epic and stating the requirements a work must meet in order to be considered in the epic genre, it is important to establish the constraints to which the definition must acquiesce. At bare minimum, the six epics in the English 111 curriculum must meet the requirements of epic. If this is untrue, than the new definition could not be the definition the class uses. Next, the definition cannot be so restrictive that only the six works or some insignificant number of works are included. The definition of epic does not have to include all of the works considered epic under the classic definition, but it cannot be a list of works arbitrarily named to be epic in a tautological fashion. The new definition cannot just simply be all works of art, as there has to be some delineation between works that “feel” epic and those that don’t. Finally, it is necessary that this definition is not arbitrarily created simply for the purpose of the course as it must have some broader application. Certainly, “arbitrary” and similar words have no definitive requirements and thus it is necessary to bridge the emotional component of art and the strict definitions required to analyze epic. The works that are included in the definition must “feel” epic. 
	
Given these restrictions, a list of epics to draw from, and the motivation, we work towards creating such a definition. Instead of growing a definition organically—growing a definition out of mall discoveries, we propose a definition that meets the requirements of being a definition and then evaluate its merits in order to make the strongest argument for The Dark Knight. The following definition is proposed in the scope of English 111: 

### Epic: A narrative primarily concerned on defining heroism that is supported by an exemplary hero

Like the classic definition of epic, this new definition of epic maintains that it is the construction and execution that makes a work an epic, not the story or plot of the narrative. Retellings of Achilles’s heroics are plentiful, but it is The Iliad that is an epic, not merely any version of the story. A bright differentiating line should be drawn between narratives with heroes and a narrative that is heroism-centered. Not all narratives that feature heroes are heroism-focused. The exact mechanisms or structural aspects of any epic work that differentiate epics from hero narratives will be discussed in detail in terms of the six works that the class features. The definition passes the initial restrictions. Namely, not all works of art are epics. Not only does the definition preclude any works that are not narratives or narratives that do not include a hero, works that do not move to define heroism are not included in the definition’s scope. The proceeding argument is that works included in this definition “feel” epic and that the six works that English 111 is concerned with meet the epic requirement.

#### Evaluating the New Definition

In order to demonstrate that the preceding definition could potentially be the definition in the scope of the class, it is easiest to determine how each of the six epics fulfills the definition. The Iliad features a hero, Achilles. The Iliad contrasts Achilles with the numerous other Greek and Trojan warriors in an effort to analyze the notion that heroism manifests itself in terms of kleōs and timê.  In addition to his superior combat abilities, Achilles struggles weighing kleōs and timê above life and family. In the conclusion of The Iliad, the two competing definitions of heroism attempt to be reconciled. Achilles is a hero because he is an excellent warrior and he is driven by elements other than material goods and eternal glory—the definition of heroism that The Iliad moves is valid. 
	
The Odyssey sets forth a different version of heroism that can be thought of as heroism in a different aspect of life or in a different environment. If The Iliad defines heroism on the battlefield, The Odyssey defines heroism in human relationships. Odysseus, the hero, faces substantially different challenges than Achilles does. Indeed, his journey brings him to the shores of many people before ultimately returning home to test his family and punish his wife’s suitors. The Odyssey structures the dialogue on heroism in terms of the many comparisons and foils that are made between Odysseus and Penelope and other, less fortunate characters such as Agamemnon and Clytemnestra. Indeed, Orestes, who avenges his father and punishes the unfaithful couple, is represented as a hero. Additionally, The Odyssey refers directly back to The Iliad through the inclusion of Achilles, who attests to Odysseus that he would rather be alive than dead and that he is chiefly concerned with his son. The Odyssey, as a story primarily driven by relationship and family conflicts, asserts that a hero is one that is faithful to the family. This definition of heroism is supported by nearly the entire cast of characters, from Orestes to Penelope. 

A very similar epic to The Iliad and The Odyssey is The Aeneid. The Aeneid more directly asserts its version of heroism, which is found almost independent of the hero, Aeneas. Rather, a version of heroism is demanded of Aeneas, “But you, Roman, remember, rule with all your power / the people of the earth—these will be your arts: / to put your stamp on the works and ways of peace, / to spare the defeated, break the proud in war.” The Aeneid seeks to define the heroism for Romans. Aeneas serves as an excellent example of a Roman hero. 
	
Paradise Lost asserts an entirely new definition of heroism, breaking completely from the Greek and Roman tradition of warfare heroism.  Indeed, Milton cites “patience and heroic martyrdom” as more worthy subjects of epic poetry. Calling upon his divine muse, Milton then proceeds to use Adam as an example of heroism while simultaneously situating Satan, portrayed indistinguishably as a Greek hero, as the antihero. This definition stems from Jesus’s self sacrifice for the good of humanity, but Jesus is not the hero.
	
This separation of the definition of heroism from heroes is also evident in Middlemarch. Indeed, Eliot brings epic to “insignificant” people. In the prelude, Eliot asserts that despite the lack of modern day Theresa’s, Theresa’s are frequently born to unsung heroics. Finally, in the finale, Eliot concludes by defining heroism as the unnoticed sacrifices, such as those demonstrated by Dorothea and others. This separation of the definition of heroism from the actual hero and the existence of multiple heroic role models is an excellent indication that the narrative is heroism-centered. Using this simple, clear guideline makes it evident that The Aeneid, Paradise Lost and Middlemarch are all epics under the redefinition of epic. Additionally, the significant focus given to the ideal of heroism by The Iliad and The Odyssey gives weight to their heroism focused narrative and inclusion into the new epic definition. 
	
The final work is Star Wars, which returns to epic’s roots in large, prolonged battle scenes and extensive travel. Star Wars, arguably, has the weakest argument into the new heroic genre. It is easy to write off Star Wars as a hero-focused narrative rather than a heroism-focused narrative. There are few moments in the film where heroism could be separated from the hero. Rather than questioning contemporary concepts of heroism (The Iliad and The Odyssey), demonstrating the shortcomings in old conceptions (Paradise Lost), or reimagining heroism in ordinary people (Middlemarch), Star Wars relies on contemporary conceptions of heroism in fantastical situations. However, perhaps a slightly more imaginative analysis, focused not on the simple plot of a hero bringing down the bad guy, but rather on the presentation itself can assist in separating heroism from the hero. Star Wars can be seen as a battle between technological and natural forces. From this perspective, Star Wars seeks to find heroism in a world that must accept both technology and natural forces. From characters like R2-D2, who is completely robotic, to characters like Leia, who is completely natural, Star Wars asserts that technology does not prevent heroism, but that heroism is separate from technological and natural forces entirely. Though a stretch, this reading of Star Wars is supported and improved by the other movies in the original trilogy. As such, Star Wars can be fit into the new definition of epic. 

#### Benefits of the New Definition

This new definition of epic offers merits of its own. Instead of defining epic around structural elements like a trip to the Underworld, divine intervention, in medias res, etc., these structural elements can be analyzed as tools that help the work define heroism. The iconic shields found in The Iliad and The Aeneid work not only to establish the hero character, but also s emphasis of what heroism represents. Milton uses the same structural element in Paradise Lost to cast Satan as a symbol of Greek heroism—the form of heroism that he is attempting to critique. These various structural elements that are often listed when attempting to define epic are still crucial to making a work epic, as they allow the creator to either successfully or unsuccessfully define heroism and make the work heroism-centered. Thus, works no longer need to adhere to old techniques of invocating a muse to remain an epic (or be poetry for that matter). This definition is more welcoming to works in other forms, though they still must be narratives per the definition. 
### The Dark Knight
	
After establishing a definition of epic that the class could potentially be guided by, we are now able to demonstrate the merits of including The Dark Knight into the syllabus. By definition, to be epic, The Dark Knight would have to attempt to define heroism, have an exemplary hero and for the sake of the analysis, it would be nice to be able to separate the hero from the definition of heroism. Unfortunately for the analysis, no one in The Dark Knight blatantly announces a new definition of heroism. However, there are enough structural components presented in the film to set forth a definition of heroism that is distinct from Batman. The plot of The Dark Knight is driven by The Joker, a villain that seeks to introduce as much chaos as possible into Gotham. Driven not by money, or any obvious motivation, The Joker fits into the category of people that “just want to watch the world burn.” The Dark Knight features this corrupting force and watches it spread through the city. Heroism is defined in respect to the corrupting force that is The Joker. The Dark Knight features a slew of characters that are tested by The Joker. There are two sets of criminals and two sets of heroes. It is from these four groups that The Dark Knight makes its claim about heroism. Heroism is not limited to people who do good, according to The Dark Knight, as one group of criminals display. Trapped on a boat, a group of criminals make the heroic decision to not kill the people on the other boat in order to save themselves. This is contrasted with a group of criminals robbing a bank who willingly kill one another to get more money. A similar split is found in the two models of good and virtue that the film presents. Harvey Dent, renown for his heroic actions in Gotham, is easily corrupted by The Joker. Feeling slighted by the world, chance, and those that he trusted, Harvey Dent is successfully manipulated by The Joker to destroy those that he once cared about. In contrast, despite his anger towards The Joker for killing his loved one, Batman spares The Joker, maintaining to uphold his code of morals. Forced to take public responsibility for multiple deaths in order to save the name of Harvey Dent, Batman offers a definition of heroism that is quiet, unseen, and unnoticed. Indeed, while the audience recognizes Batman as a hero, the populace of Gotham does not. As Gordon explains, “Because he's the hero Gotham deserves, but not the one it needs right now. So we'll hunt him. Because he can take it. Because he's not our hero.” Heroism is not just a running theme throughout The Dark Knight, defining heroism is the running theme. The Dark Knight is a heroism-centered narrative and an epic.
	
Having established The Dark Knight as an epic under the new definition and argued for its right to be included in English 111, it is necessary to examine whether The Dark Knight would be appropriate to be discussed. There is certainly enough ammunition in The Dark Knight to argue for its inclusion into the epic genre, especially given a new definition. whether it is worth having in a class curriculum is even more debatable. But it certainly is quotable. 

### Conclusion
	
Despite having redefined epic to suit the needs of The Dark Knight, there is value in not defining epic at all. It is possible that epic as it is known began in the midst of a narrative tradition that predates Homer by centuries and we’ve simply seen the middle. Epic spans huge realms of time, space, culture, life, and action. Epic, inspired by Gods, continues to inspire. And perhaps instead of attempting to define epic, it is best to leave epic as it is—epic.
 
